The enquiry made possible by Freud’s work has already resulted
fruitfully; we are indebted to this stimulation for some bold attacks
upon the territory of the history of the human mind. There are the works
of Riklin,[5] Abraham,[6] Rank,[7] Maeder,[8] Jones,[9]—recently
Silberer has joined their ranks with a beautiful investigation entitled
“Phantasie und Mythus.”[10] We are indebted to Pfister[11] for a
comprehensive work which cannot be overlooked here, and which is of much
importance for Christian religious psychology. The leading purpose of
these works is the unlocking of historical problems through the
application of psychoanalytic knowledge; that is to say, knowledge drawn
from the activity of the modern unconscious mind concerning specific
historical material.

I must refer the reader entirely to the specified works, in order that
he may gain information concerning the extent and the kind of insight
which has already been obtained. The explanations are in many cases
dubious in particulars; nevertheless, this detracts in no way from the
total result. It would be significant enough if only the far-reaching
analogy between the psychologic structure of the historical relics and
the structure of the recent individual psychologic products alone were
demonstrated. This proof is possible of attainment for every intelligent
person through the work done up to this time. The analogy prevails
especially in symbolism, as Riklin, Rank, Maeder, and Abraham have
pointed out with illuminating examples; it is also shown in the
individual mechanisms of unconscious work, that is to say in repression,
condensation, etc., as Abraham explicitly shows.

Up to the present time the psychoanalytic investigator has turned his
interest chiefly to the analysis of the individual psychologic problems.
It seems to me, however, that in the present state of affairs there is a
more or less imperative demand for the psychoanalyst to broaden the
analysis of the individual problems by a comparative study of historical
material relating to them, just as Freud has already done in a masterly
manner in his book on “Leonardo da Vinci.”[12] For, just as the
psychoanalytic conceptions promote understanding of the historic
psychologic creations, so reversedly historical materials can shed new
light upon individual psychologic problems. These and similar
considerations have caused me to turn my attention somewhat more to the
historical, in the hope that, out of this, new insight into the
foundations of individual psychology might be won.