mother. In those later religions, where the hero, who in olden times
overcomes all evil and death through his labors, has become the divine
chief figure, he becomes the priestly sacrificer and the regenerator of
life. But as the hero is an imaginary figure and his sacrifice is a
transcendental mystery, the significance of which far exceeds the value
of an ordinary sacrificial gift, this deepening of the sacrificial
symbolism regressively resumes the idea of the human sacrifice. This is
partly due to the preponderance of phantastic additions, which always
take their subject-matter from greater depths, and partly due to the
higher religious occupation of the libido, which demanded a more
complete and equivalent expression. Thus the relation between Mithra and
his bull is very close. It is the hero himself in the Christian
mysteries who sacrifices himself voluntarily. The hero, as we have
sufficiently shown, is the infantile personality longing for the mother,
who as Mithra sacrifices the wish (the libido), and as Christ gives
himself to death both willingly and unwillingly. Upon the monuments of
the Mithraic religion we often meet a strange symbol: a crater (mixing
bowl) encoiled by a serpent, sometimes with a lion, who as antagonist
opposes the serpent.[840] It appears as if the two were fighting for the
crater. The crater symbolizes, as we have seen, the mother, the serpent
the resistance defending her, and the lion the greatest strength and
strongest will.[841] The struggle is for the mother. The serpent takes
part almost regularly in the Mithraic sacrifice of the bull, moving
towards the blood flowing from the wound. It seems to follow from that
that the life of the bull (blood) is sacrificed to the serpent.


Previously we have pointed out the mutual relationship between serpent

and bull, and found there that the bull symbolizes the living hero, the
shining sun, but that the serpent symbolizes the dead, buried or
chthonic hero, the invisible sun. As the hero is in the mother in the
state of death, the serpent is also, as the symbol of the fear of death,
the sign of the devouring mother. The sacrifice of the bull to the
serpent, therefore, signifies a willing renunciation of life, in order
to win it from death. Therefore, after the sacrifice of the bull,
wonderful fertility results. The antagonism between serpent and lion


over the crater is to be interpreted as a battle over the fruitful

mother’s womb, somewhat comparable to the more simple symbolism of the
Tishtriya song, where the demon Apaosha, the black horse, has possession
of the rain lake, and the white horse, Tishtriya, must banish him from
it. Death from time to time lays its destroying hand upon life and
fertility and the libido disappears, by entering into the mother, from
whose womb it will be born renewed. It, therefore, seems very probable


that the significance of the Mithraic bull sacrifice is also that of the

sacrifice of the mother who sends the fear of death. As the contrary of
the Occide moriturus is also intended here, so is the act of sacrifice
an impregnating of the mother; the chthonic snake demon drinks the
blood; that is to say, the libido (sperma) of the hero committing
incest. Life is thus immortalized for the hero because, like the sun, he
generates himself anew. After all the preceding materials, it can no


longer be difficult to recognize in the Christian mysteries the human

sacrifice, or the sacrifice of the son to the mother.[842] Just as Attis
emasculates himself on account of the mother, so does Christ himself
hang upon the tree of life,[843] the wood of martyrdom, the ἑκάτη,[844]
the chthonic mother, and by that redeems creation from death. By
entering again into the mother’s womb (Matuta, Pietà of Michelangelo) he
redeems in death the sin in life of the primitive man, Adam, in order
symbolically through his deed[845] to procure for the innermost and most


hidden meaning of the religious libido its highest satisfaction and most

pronounced expression. The martyrdom of Christ has in Augustine as well
actually the meaning of a Hierosgamos with the mother (corresponding to
the Adonis festival, where Venus and Adonis were laid upon the nuptial
couch):

  “Procedit Christus quasi sponsus de thalamo suo, præsagio nuptiarum
  exiit ad campum sæculi; pervenit usque ad crucis torum (torus has the
  meaning of bed, pillow, concubine, bier) et ibi firmavit ascendendo
  conjugium: ubi cum sentiret anhelantem in suspiriis creaturam
  commercio pietatis se pro conjuge dedit ad pœnam et copulavit sibi
  perpetuo iure matronam.”

This passage is perfectly clear. A similar death overtakes the Syrian
Melcarth, who, riding upon a sea horse, was annually burned. Among the
Greeks he is called Melicertes, and was represented riding upon a
dolphin. The dolphin is also the steed of Arion. We have learned to
recognize previously the maternal significance of dolphin, so that in


the death of Melcarth we can once more recognize the negatively

expressed Hierosgamos with the mother. (Compare Frazer “Golden Bough,”
IV, p. 87.) This figurative expression is of the greatest teleological
significance. Through its symbol it leads that libido which inclines
backward into the original, primitive and impulsive upwards to the
spiritual by investing it with a mysterious but fruitful function. It is


superfluous to speak of the effect of this symbol upon the unconscious

of Occidental humanity. A glance over history shows what creative forces
were released in this symbol.[846]


The comparison of the Mithraic and the Christian sacrifice plainly shows

wherein lies the superiority of the Christian symbol; it is the frank
admission that not only are the lower wishes to be sacrificed, but the
whole personality. The Christian symbol demands complete devotion; it
compels a veritable self-sacrifice to a higher purpose, while the
Sacrificium Mithriacum, remaining fixed on a primitive symbolic stage,
is contented with an animal sacrifice. The religious effect of these


symbols must be considered as an orientation of the unconscious by means

of imitation.

In Miss Miller’s phantasy there is internal compulsion, in that she
passes from the horse sacrifice to the self-sacrifice of the hero.
Whereas the first symbolizes renunciation of the sexual wishes, the


second has the deeper and ethically more valuable meaning of the

sacrifice of the infantile personality. The object of psychoanalysis has


frequently been wrongly understood to mean the renunciation or the

gratification of the ordinary sexual wish, while, in reality, the
problem is the sublimation of the infantile personality, or, expressed
mythologically, a sacrifice and rebirth of the infantile hero.[847] In
the Christian mysteries, however, the resurrected one becomes a
supermundane spirit, and the invisible kingdom of God, with its
mysterious gifts, are obtained by his believers through the sacrifice of
himself on the mother. In psychoanalysis the infantile personality is
deprived of its libido fixations in a rational manner; the libido which


is thus set free serves for the building up of a personality matured and

adapted to reality, who does willingly and without complaint everything
required by necessity. (It is, so to speak, the chief endeavor of the


infantile personality to struggle against all necessities and to create

coercions for itself where none exist in reality.)


The serpent as an instrument of sacrifice has already been abundantly

illustrated. (Legend of St. Silvester, trial of the virgins, wounding of
Rê and Philoctetes, symbolism of the lance and arrow.) It is the
destroying knife; but, according to the principle of the “Occide
moriturus” also the phallus, the sacrificial act represents a coitus act
as well.[848] The religious significance of the serpent as a
cave-dwelling, chthonic animal points to a further thought; namely, to
the creeping into the mother’s womb in the form of a serpent.[849] As
the horse is the brother, so the serpent is the sister of Chiwantopel.


This close relation refers to a fellowship of these animals and their

characters with the hero. We know of the horse that, as a rule, he is
not an animal of fear, although, mythologically, he has at times this
meaning. He signifies much more the living, positive part of the libido,
the striving towards continual renewal, whereas the serpent, as a rule,
represents the fear, the fear of death,[850] and is thought of as the
antithesis to the phallus. This antithesis between horse and serpent,
mythologically between bull and serpent, represents an opposition of the
libido within itself, a striving forwards and a striving backwards at
one and the same time.[851] It is not only as if the libido might be an
irresistible striving forward, an endless life and will for
construction, such as Schopenhauer has formulated in his world will,


death and every end being some malignancy or fatality coming from

without, but the libido, corresponding to the sun, also wills the
destruction of its creation. In the first half of life its will is for
growth, in the second half of life it hints, softly at first, and then
audibly, at its will for death. And just as in youth the impulse to


unlimited growth often lies under the enveloping covering of a

resistance against life, so also does the will of the old to die


frequently lie under the covering of a stubborn resistance against the

end.

[Illustration: PRIAPUS AND SERPENT]


This apparent contrast in the nature of the libido is strikingly


illustrated by a Priapic statuette in the antique collection at

Verona.[852] Priapus smilingly points with his finger to a snake biting
off his “membrum.” He carries a basket on his arm, filled with oblong
objects, probably phalli, evidently prepared as substitutes.

A similar motive is found in the “Deluge” of Rubens (in the Munich Art
Gallery), where a serpent emasculates a man. This motive explains the
meaning of the “Deluge”; the maternal sea is also the devouring
mother.[853] The phantasy of the world conflagration, of the cataclysmic
end of the world in general, is nothing but a mythological projection of
a personal individual will for death; therefore, Rubens could represent
the essence of the “Deluge” phantasy in the emasculation by the serpent;
for the serpent is our own repressed will for the end, for which we find
an explanation only with the greatest difficulty.

Concerning the symbolism of the serpent in general, its significance is
very dependent upon the time of life and circumstances. The repressed
sexuality of youth is symbolized by the serpent, because the arrival of
sexuality puts an end to childhood. To age, on the contrary, the serpent
signifies the repressed thought of death. With our author it is the
insufficiently expressed sexuality which as serpent assumes the rôle of
sacrificer and delivers the hero over to death and rebirth.

As in the beginning of our investigation the hero’s name forced us to


speak of the symbolism of Popocatepetl as belonging to the creating part

of the human body, so at the end does the Miller drama again give us an


opportunity of seeing how the volcano assists in the death of the hero


and causes him to disappear by means of an earthquake into the depths of