    waves.
 And the mother, mourning, hearkened to the cry of her child,
 And rose, like a cloud, from the bed of the sea,
 Soothing with tender embraces the pains of her darling;
 And he listened, while she, caressing, promised to soften his grief.


 “Son of the Gods! Oh, were I like you, then could I confidently
 Call on the Heavenly Ones to hearken to my secret grief.
 But never shall I see this—I shall bear the disgrace
 As if I never belonged to her, even though she thinks of me with tears.
 Beneficent Ones! And yet Ye hear the lightest prayers of men.
 Ah, how rapt and fervently I worshipped you, holy Light,
 Since I have lived, the Earth and its fountains and woodlands,
 Father Ether—and my heart has felt you about me, so ardent and pure—
 Oh, soften my sorrows, ye Kind Ones,
 That my soul may not be silenced, may not be struck dumb too early;
 That I may live and thank Ye, O Heavenly Powers,
 With joyful songs through all the hurrying days.
 Thank ye for gifts of the past, for the joys of vanished Youth—
 And then, pray, take me, the lonely one,
 Graciously, unto yourselves.”


These poems describe more plainly than could be depicted with meagre


words the persistent arrest and the constantly growing estrangement from

life, the gradual deep immersion into the maternal abyss of the
individual being. The apocalyptic song of Patmos is strangely related to
these songs of retrogressive longing. It enters as a dismal guest
surrounded by the mist of the depths, the gathering clouds of insanity,
bred through the mother. In it the primitive thoughts of the myth, the
suggestion clad in symbols, of the sun-like death and resurrection of
life, again burst forth. Similar things are to be found in abundance
among sick people of this sort.

I reproduce some significant fragments from Patmos:

                       “Near is the God
                       And hard to comprehend,


                       But where Danger threatens

                       The Rescuer appears.”

These words mean that the libido has now sunk to the lowest depths,
where “the danger is great.” (Faust, Part II, Mother scene.) There “the
God is near”; there man may find the inner sun, his own nature, sun-like
and self-renewing, hidden in the mother-womb like the sun in the
nighttime:

            “... In Chasms


            And in darkness dwell

            The eagles; and fresh and fearlessly


            The Sons of the Alps pass swiftly over the abyss

            Upon lightly swinging bridges.”

With these words the dark phantastic poem passes on. The eagle, the bird
of the sun, dwells in darkness—the libido has hidden itself, but high
above it the inhabitants of the mountains pass, probably the gods (“Ye
are walking above in the light”), symbols of the sun wandering across
the sky, like the eagle flying over the depths:

            “... Above and around are reared
            The summits of Time,
            And the loved ones, though near,
            Live on deeply separated mountains.
            So give us waters of innocence,
            And give us wings of true understanding,
            With which to pass across and to return again.”

The first is a gloomy picture of the mountains and of time—although
caused by the sun wandering over the mountains, the following picture a
nearness, and at the same time separation, of the lovers, and seems to
hint at life in the underworld,[796] where he is united with all that
once was dear to him, and yet cannot enjoy the happiness of reunion,
because it is all shadows and unreal and devoid of life. Here the one
who descends drinks the waters of innocence, the waters of childhood,
the drink of rejuvenation,[797] so wings may grow, and, winged, he may
soar up again into life, like the winged sun, which arises like a swan
from the water (“Wings, to pass across and to return again”):

              “... So I spoke, and lo, a genie
              Carried me off, swifter than I had imagined,


              And farther than ever I had thought

              From my own house!


              It grew dark

              As I went in the twilight.
              The shadowy wood,
              And the yearning brooks of my home-land
              Grew vague behind me—
              And I knew the country no longer.”

After the dark and obscure words of the introduction, wherein the poet
expresses the prophecy of what is to come, the sun journey begins
(“night journey in the sea”) towards the east, towards the ascent,
towards the mystery of eternity and rebirth, of which Nietzsche also
dreams, and which he expressed in significant words:

  “Oh, how could I not be ardent for eternity, and for the nuptial ring
  of rings—the ring of the return! Never yet have I found the woman from
  whom I wish children, unless she would be this woman whom I love; for
  I love thee, O eternity.”

Hölderlin expresses this same longing in a beautiful symbol, the
individual traits of which are already familiar to us:

          “... But soon in a fresh radiance


          Mysteriously

          Blossoming in golden smoke,
          With the rapidly growing steps of the sun,
          Making a thousand summits fragrant,
          Asia arose!
          And, dazzled,
          I sought one whom I knew;
          For unfamiliar to me were the broad roads,


          Where from Tmolus

          Comes the gilded Pactol,
          And Taurus stands and Messagis—
          And the gardens are full of flowers.


          But high up in the light

          The silvery snow gleams, a silent fire;
          And, as a symbol of eternal life,
          On the impassable walls,
          Grows the ancient ivy.[798]


          And carried by columns of living cedars and laurels

          Are the solemn, divinely built palaces.”

The symbol is apocalyptic, the maternal city in the land of eternal
youth, surrounded by the verdure and flowers of imperishable
spring.[799] The poet identifies himself here with John, who lived on
Patmos, who was once associated with “the sun of the Highest,” and saw
him face to face:

      “There at the Mystery of the Vine they met,
      There at the hour of the Holy Feast they gathered,
      And—feeling the approach of Death in his great, quiet soul,
      The Lord, pouring out his last love, spoke,
      And then he died.
      Much could be said of it—
      How his triumphant glance,
      The happiest of all,
      Was seen by his companions, even at the last.

             ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

      Therefore he sent the Spirit unto them,
      And the house trembled, solemnly;
      And, with distant thunder,


      The storm of God rolled over the cowering heads

      Where, deep in thought,
      The heroes of death were assembled....
      Now, when he, in parting,
      Appeared once more before them,
      Then the kingly day, the day of the sun, was put out,
      And the gleaming sceptre, formed of his rays,
      Was broken—and suffered like a god itself.


      Yet it shall return and glow again

      When the right time comes.”


The fundamental pictures are the sacrificial death and the resurrection

of Christ, like the self-sacrifice of the sun, which voluntarily breaks
its sceptre, the fructifying rays, in the certain hope of resurrection.
The following comments are to be noted in regard to “the sceptre of
rays”: Spielrein’s patient says, “God pierces through the earth with his
rays.” The earth, in the patient’s mind, has the meaning of woman. She
also comprehends the sunbeam in mythologic fashion as something solid:
“Jesus Christ has shown me his love, by striking against the window with
a sunbeam.” Among other insane patients I have come across the same idea
of the solid substance of the sunbeam. Here there is also a hint of the
phallic nature of the instrument which is associated with the hero.
Thor’s hammer, which, cleaving the earth, penetrates deeply into it, may
be compared to the foot of Kaineus. The hammer is retained in the
interior of the earth, like the treasure, and, in the course of time, it
gradually comes again to the surface (“the treasure blooms”), meaning
that it was born again from the earth. (Compare what has been said
concerning the etymology of “swelling.”) On many monuments Mithra holds
a peculiar object in his hands, which Cumont compares to a half-filled
tube. Dieterich proves from his papyrus text that the object is the
shoulder of the bull, the bear constellation. The shoulder has an
indirect phallic meaning, for it is the part which is wanting in Pelops.
Pelops was slaughtered by his father, Tantalus, dismembered, and boiled
in a kettle, to make a meal for the gods. Demeter had unsuspectingly
eaten the shoulder from this feast, when Zeus discovered the outrage. He
had the pieces thrown back into the kettle, and, with the help of the
life-dispensing Clotho, Pelops was regenerated, and the shoulder which
was missing was replaced by an ivory one. This substitution is a close
parallel to the substitution of the missing phallus of Osiris. Mithra is
represented in a special ceremony, holding the bull’s shoulder over Sol,
his son and vice-regent. This scene may be compared to a sort of
dedication, or accolade (something like the ceremony of confirmation).
The blow of the hammer as a generating, fructifying, inspiring function
is retained as a folk-custom and expressed by striking with the twig of
life, which has the significance of a charm of fertility. In the
neuroses, the sexual meaning of castigation plays an important part, for
among many children castigation may elicit a sexual orgasm. The ritual
act of striking has the same significance of generating (fructifying),
and is, indeed, merely a variant of the original phallic ceremonial. Of
similar character to the bull’s shoulder is the cloven hoof of the
devil, to which a sexual meaning also appertains. The ass’s jawbone
wielded by Samson has the same worth. In the Polynesian Maui myth the
jawbone, the weapon of the hero, is derived from the man-eating woman,
Muriranga-whenua, whose body swells up enormously from lusting for human
flesh (Frobenius). Hercules’ club is made from the wood of the maternal
olive tree. Faust’s key also “knows the mothers.” The libido springs
from the mother, and with this weapon alone can man overcome death.

It corresponds to the phallic nature of the ass’s jawbone, that at the
place where Samson threw it God caused a spring to gush forth[800]
(springs from the horse’s tread, footsteps, horse’s hoof). To this
relation of meanings belongs the magic wand, the sceptre in general.
Σκῆτρον belongs to σκᾶπος, σκηπάνων, σκήπων = staff; σκηπτός =
stormwind; Latin _scapus_ = shaft, stock, scapula, shoulder; Old High
German _Scaft_ = spear, lance.[801] We meet once more in this
compilation those connections which are already well known to us:
Sun-phallus as tube of the winds, lance and shoulder-blade.


The passage from Asia through Patmos to the Christian mysteries in the

poem of Hölderlin is apparently a superficial connection, but in reality
a very ingenious train of thought; namely, the entrance into death and
the land beyond as a self-sacrifice of the hero, for the attainment of
immortality. At this time, when the sun has set, when love is apparently
dead, man awaits in mysterious joy the renewal of all life:

               “... And Joy it was


               From now on


               To live in the loving night and see


               The eyes of innocence hold the unchanging

               Depths of all wisdom.”

Wisdom dwells in the depths, the wisdom of the mother: being one with
it, insight is obtained into the meaning of deeper things, into all the
deposits of primitive times, the strata of which have been preserved in
the soul. Hölderlin, in his diseased ecstasy, feels once more the
greatness of the things seen, but he does not care to bring up to the
light of day that which he had found in the depths—in this he differs
from Faust.

              “And it is not an evil, if a few
              Are lost and never found, and if the speech
              Conceals the living sound;
              Because each godly work resembles ours;
              And yet the Highest does not plan it all—
              The great pit bears two irons,
              And the glowing lava of Aetna....


              Would I had the power