Mithra relief of Heddernheim. Upon one side of a large stone slab
(formerly probably rotating) is seen the stereotyped overthrowing and
sacrifice of the bull, but upon the other side stands Sol, with a bunch
of grapes in his hand, Mithra with the cornucopia, the Dadophores with
fruits, corresponding to the legend that all fecundity proceeds from the
dead bull of the world, fruits from the horns, wine from its blood,
grain from the tail, cattle from its sperma, leek from its nose, and so
on. Silvanus stands above this scene with the animals of the forest
arising from him. The significance suspected by Creuzer might very
easily belong to the dog in this connection.[479] Let us now turn back
to the myth of Osiris. In spite of the restoration of the corpse
accomplished by Isis, the resuscitation succeeds only incompletely in so
far as the phallus of Osiris cannot again be produced, because it was
eaten by the fishes; the power of life was wanting.[480] Osiris as a
phantom once more impregnated Isis, but the fruit is Harpocrates, who
was feeble in τοῖς κάτωθεν γυίοις (in the lower limbs), that is,
corresponding to the significance of γυῖον (at the feet). (Here, as is
plainly evident, foot is used in the phallic meaning.) This incurability
of the setting sun corresponds to the incurability of Rê in the
above-mentioned older Egyptian sun hymn. Osiris, although only a
phantom, now prepares the young sun, his son Horus, for a battle with
Typhon, the evil spirit of darkness. Osiris and Horus correspond to the
father-son symbolism mentioned in the beginning, which symbolic figure,
corresponding again to the above formulation,[481] is flanked by the
well-formed and ugly figures of Horus and Harpocrates, the latter
appearing mostly as a cripple, often represented distorted to a mere
caricature.[482]

He is confused in the tradition very much with Horus, with whom he also
has the name in common. Hor-pi-chrud, as his real name[483] reads, is
composed from _chrud_, “child,” and _Hor_, from the adjective _hri_ =
up, on top, and signifies the up-coming child, as the rising sun, and
opposed to Osiris, who personifies the setting sun—the sun of the west.
Thus Osiris and Horpichrud or Horus are one being, both husband and son
of the same mother, Hathor-Isis. The Chnum-Ra, the sun god of lower
Egypt, represented as a ram, has at his side, as the female divinity of
the land, Hatmehit, who wears the fish on her head. She is the mother
and wife of Bi-neb-did (Ram, local name of Chnum-Ra). In the hymn of
Hibis,[484] Amon-ra was invoked:

  “Thy (Chum-Ram) dwells in Mendes, united as the quadruple god Thmuis.
  He is the phallus, the lord of the gods. The bull of his mother
  rejoices in the cow (ahet, the mother) and man fructifies through his
  semen.”

In further inscriptions Hatmehit was directly referred to as the “mother
of Mendes.” (Mendes is the Greek form of Bi-neb-did: ram.) She is also
invoked as the “Good,” with the additional significance of _ta-nofert_,
or “young woman.” The cow as symbol of the mother is found in all
possible forms and variations of Hathor-Isis, and also in the female Nun
(parallel to this is the primitive goddess Nit or Neith), the protoplasm
which, related to the Hindoo Atman,[485] is equally of masculine and
feminine nature. Nun is, therefore, invoked as Amon,[486] the original
water,[487] which is in the beginning. He is also designated as the
father of fathers, the mother of mothers. To this corresponds the
invocation to the female side of Nun-Amon, of Nit or Neith.

  “Nit, the ancient, the mother of god, the mistress of Esne, the father
  of fathers, the mother of mothers, who is the beetle and the vulture,
  the being in its beginning.

  “Nit, the ancient, the mother who bore the light god, Râ, who bore
  first of all, when there was nothing which brought forth.

  “The cow, the ancient, which bore the sun, and then laid the germ of
  gods and men.”

The word “nun” has the significance of young, fresh, new, also the
on-coming waters of the Nile flood. In a transferred sense “nun” was
also used for the chaotic primitive waters; in general for the primitive
generating matter[488] which was personified by the goddess Nunet. From
her Nut sprang, the goddess of heaven, who was represented with a starry
body, and also as the heavenly cow with a starry body.

When the sun-god, little by little, retires on the back of the heavenly
cow, just as poor Lazarus returns into Abraham’s bosom, each has the
same significance; they return into the mother, in order to rise as
Horus. Thus it can be said that in the morning the goddess is the
mother, at noon the sister-wife and in the evening again the mother, who
receives the dying in her lap, reminding us of the Pietà of
Michelangelo. As shown by the illustration (from Dideron’s “Iconographie
Chrétienne”), this thought has been transferred as a whole into
Christianity.

Thus the fate of Osiris is explained: he passes into the mother’s womb,
the chest, the sea, the tree, the column of Astartes; he is dismembered,
re-formed, and reappears again in his son, Hor-pi-chrud.


Before entering upon the further mysteries which the beautiful myth

reveals to us, there is still much to be said about the symbol of the
tree. Osiris lies in the branches of the tree, surrounded by them, as in
the mother’s womb. The motive of _embracing and entwining_ is often
found in the sun myths, meaning that it is the _myth of rebirth_. A good
example is the Sleeping Beauty, also the legend of the girl who is
enclosed between the bark and the trunk, but who is freed by a youth
with his horn.[489] The horn is of gold and silver, which hints at the
sunbeam in the phallic meaning. (Compare the previous legend of the
horn.) An exotic legend tells of the sun-hero, how he must be freed from
the plant entwining around him.[490] A girl dreams of her lover who has
fallen into the water; she tries to save him, but first has to pull
seaweed and sea-grass from the water; then she catches him. In an
African myth the hero, after his act, must first be disentangled from
the seaweed. In a Polynesian myth the hero’s ship was encoiled by the
tentacles of a gigantic polyp. Rê’s ship is encoiled by a night serpent
on its night journey on the sea. In the poetic rendering of the history
of Buddha’s birth by Sir Edwin Arnold (“The Light of Asia,” p. 5) the
motive of an embrace is also found:

         “Queen Maya stood at noon, her days fulfilled,
         Under a Palso in the palace grounds,
         A stately trunk, straight as a temple shaft,
         With crown of glossy leaves and fragrant blooms;
         And knowing the time come—for all things knew—


         The conscious tree bent down its boughs to make

         A bower about Queen Maya’s majesty:


         And earth put forth a thousand sudden flowers

         To spread a couch: while ready for the bath


         The rock hard by gave out a limpid stream

         Of crystal flow. So brought she forth the child.”[491]


We come across a very similar motive in the cult legend of the Samian

Hera. Yearly it was claimed that the image disappeared from the temple,


was fastened somewhere on the seashore on a trunk of a Lygos tree and

wound about with its branches. There it was “found,” and was treated
with wedding-cake. This feast is undoubtedly a ἱερὸς γάμος (ritual
marriage), because in Samos there was a legend that Zeus had first had a
long-continued secret love relation with Hera. In Plataea and Argos, the
marriage procession was represented with bridesmaids, marriage feast,
and so on. The festival took place in the wedding month “Γαμηλιών”
(beginning of February). But in Plataea the image was previously carried
into a lonely place in the wood; approximately corresponding to the


legend of Plutarch that Zeus had kidnapped Hera and then had hidden her

in a cave of Cithaeron. According to our deductions, previously made, we
must conclude from this that there is still another train of thought,
namely, the magic charm of a rejuvenation, which is condensed in the
Hierosgamos. The disappearance and hiding in the wood, in the cave, on
the seashore, entwined in a willow tree, points to the death of the sun
and rebirth. The early springtime Γαμηλιών (the time of Marriage) in
February fits in with that very well. In fact, Pausanias informs us that
the Argivian Hera _became a maiden again by a yearly bath in the spring
of Canathos_. The significance of the bath is emphasized by the
information that in the Plataeian cult of Hera Teleia, Tritonian nymphs
appeared as water-carriers. In a tale from the Iliad, where the conjugal
couch of Zeus upon Mount Ida is described, it is said:[492]

         “The son of Saturn spake, and took his wife
         Into his arms, while underneath the pair,
         The sacred Earth threw up her freshest herbs:
         The dewy lotos, and the crocus-flower,
         And thick and soft the hyacinth. All these
         Upbore them from the ground. Upon this couch
         They lay, while o’er them a bright golden cloud
         Gathered and shed its drops of glistening dew.


         So slumbered on the heights of Gargarus

         The All-Father overcome by sleep and love,
         And held his consort in his arms.”

                                       —Trans. by W. C. Bryant.


Drexler recognizes in this description an unmistakable allusion to the

garden of the gods on the extreme western shore of the ocean, an idea
which might have been taken from a Prehomeric Hierosgamos hymn. This
western land is the land of the setting sun, whither Hercules,
Gilgamesh, etc., hasten with the sun, in order to find there
immortality, where the sun and the maternal sea unite in an eternally
rejuvenating intercourse. Our supposition of a condensation of the
Hierosgamos with the myth of rebirth is probably confirmed by this.


Pausanias mentions a related myth fragment where the statue of Artemis

Orthia is also called Lygodesma (chained with willows), because it was
found in a willow tree; this tale seems to be related to the general
Greek celebration of Hierosgamos with the above-mentioned customs.[493]

The motive of the “devouring” which Frobenius has shown to be a regular
constituent of the sun myths is closely related to this (also
metaphorically). The “whale dragon” (mother’s womb) always “devours” the
hero. The devouring may also be partial instead of complete.

A six-year-old girl, who goes to school unwillingly, dreams that her leg
is encircled by a large red worm. She had a tender interest for this
creature, contrary to what might be expected. An adult patient, who


cannot separate from an older friend on account of an extraordinarily

strong mother transference, dreams that “she had to get across some deep
water (typical idea!) with this friend; her friend fell in (mother
transference); she tries to drag her out, and almost succeeds, but a
large crab seizes on the dreamer by the foot and tries to pull her in.”

Etymology also confirms this conception: There is an Indo-Germanic root
_vélu-_, _vel-_, with the meaning of “encircling, surrounding, turning.”
From this is derived Sanskrit _val_, _valati_ = to cover, to surround,
to encircle, to encoil (symbol of the snake); _vallî_ = creeping plant;