activity; an image which apparently obeys such wholly other laws and
purposes than those governing the conscious psychic product.

_Why are dreams symbolic?_ Every “why” in psychology is divided into two
separate questions: first, _for what purpose are dreams symbolic_? We
will answer this question only to abandon it at once. Dreams are
symbolic in order that they can not be understood; in order that the
wish, which is the source of the dream, may remain unknown. The question
why this is so and not otherwise, leads us out into the far-reaching
experiences and trains of thought of the Freudian psychology.

Here the second question interests us, viz., _How is it that dreams are
symbolic?_ That is to say, from where does this capacity for symbolic
representation come, of which we, in our conscious daily life, can
discover apparently no traces?

Let us examine this more closely. Can we really discover nothing
symbolic in our every-day thought? Let us follow our trains of thought;
let us take an example. We think of the war of 1870 and 1871. We think
about a series of bloody battles, the siege of Strassburg, Belfort,
Paris, the Treaty of Peace, the foundation of the German Empire, and so
on. How have we been thinking? We start with an idea, or super-idea, as
it is also called, and without thinking of it, but each time merely
guided by a feeling of direction, we think about individual
reminiscences of the war. In this we can find nothing symbolic, and our
whole conscious thinking proceeds according to this type.[13]

If we observe our thinking very narrowly, and follow an intensive train
of thought, as, for example, the solution of a difficult problem, then
suddenly we notice that we are thinking in words, that in wholly
intensive thinking we begin to speak to ourselves, or that we
occasionally write down the problem, or make a drawing of it so as to be
absolutely clear. It must certainly have happened to any one who has
lived for some time in a foreign country, that after a certain period he
has begun to think in the language of the country. A very intensive
train of thinking works itself out more or less in _word form_; that is,
if one wants to express it, to teach it, or to convince any one of it.
Evidently it directs itself wholly to the outside world. To this extent,
this directed or logical thinking is a reality thinking,[14] having a
real existence for us; that is to say, a thinking which adjusts itself
to actual conditions,[15] where we, expressed in other words, imitate
the succession of objectively real things, so that the images in our


mind follow after each other in the same strictly causal succession as

the historical events outside of our mind.[16]

We call this thinking, thinking with directed attention. It has, in
addition, the peculiarity that one is tired by it, and that, on this
account, it is set into action only for a time. Our whole vital
accomplishment, which is so expensive, is adaptation to environment; a
part of it is the directed thinking, which, biologically expressed, is
nothing but a process of psychic assimilation, which, as in every vital
accomplishment, leaves behind a corresponding exhaustion.

The material with which we think is _language and speech concept_, a
thing which has been used from time immemorial as something external, a
bridge for thought, and which has a single purpose—that of
communication. As long as we think directedly, we think for others and
speak to others.[17]

Speech is originally a system of emotional and imitative sounds—sounds
which express terror, fear, anger, love; and sounds which imitate the
noises of the elements, the rushing and gurgling of water, the rolling
of thunder, the tumults of the winds, the tones of the animal world, and
so on; and, finally, those which represent a combination of the sounds
of perception and of affective reaction.[18] Likewise in the more or
less modern languages, large quantities of onomatopoetic relics are
retained; for example, sounds for the movement of water,—

  Rauschen, risseln, rûschen, rinnen, rennen, to rush, ruscello,
  ruisseau, river, Rhein.

  Wasser, wissen, wissern, pissen, piscis, fisch.


Thus language is originally and essentially nothing but a system of

signs or symbols, which denote real occurrences, or their echo in the
human soul.

Therefore one must decidedly agree with Anatole France,[19] when he
says,

  “What is thought, and how do we think? We think with words; that alone
  is sensual and brings us back to nature. Think of it! The


  metaphysician has only the perfected cry of monkeys and dogs with

  which to construct the system of the world. That which he calls


  profound speculation and transcendent method is to put end to end in

  an arbitrary order the natural sounds which cry out hunger, fear, and
  love in the primitive forests, and to which were attached little by
  little the meanings which one believed to be abstract, when they were
  only crude.

  “Do not fear that the succession of small cries, feeble and stifled,
  which compose a book of philosophy, will teach us so much regarding
  the universe, that we can live in it no longer.”

Thus is our directed thinking, and even if we were the loneliest and
furthest removed from our fellows, this thinking is nothing but the
first notes of a long-drawn-out call to our companions that water had
been found, that we had killed the bear, that a storm was approaching,
or that wolves were prowling around the camp. A striking paradox of
Abélard’s which expresses in a very intuitive way the whole human
limitation of our complicated thinking process, reads,—“_Sermo generatur
ab intellectu et generat intellectum_.”[20]

Any system of philosophy, no matter how abstract, represents in means


and purpose nothing more than an extremely cleverly developed

combination of original nature sounds.[21] Hence arises the desire of a
Schopenhauer or a Nietzsche for recognition and understanding, and the
despair and bitterness of their loneliness. One might expect, perhaps,


that a man full of genius could pasture in the greatness of his own

thoughts, and renounce the cheap approbation of the crowd which he
despises; yet he succumbs to the more powerful impulse of the herd
instinct. His searching and his finding, his call, belong to the herd.


When I said just now that directed thinking is properly a thinking with

words, and quoted that clever testimony of Anatole France as drastic
proof of it, a misunderstanding might easily arise, namely, that
directed thinking is really only “word.” That certainly would go too
far. Language should, however, be comprehended in a wider sense than
that of speech, which is in itself only the expression of the formulated
thought which is capable of being communicated in the widest sense.
Otherwise, the deaf mute would be limited to the utmost in his capacity
for thinking, which is not the case in reality. Without any knowledge of
the spoken word, he has his “language.” This language, considered from
the standpoint of history, or in other words, directed thinking, is here
a descendant of the primitive words, as, for instance, Wundt[22]
expresses it.

  “A further important result of that co-operation of sound and sign


  interchange consists in the fact that very many words gradually lose

  altogether their original concrete thought meaning, and turn into


  signs for general ideas and for the expression of the apperceptive

  functions of relation and comparison and their products. In this
  manner abstract thought develops, which, because it would not be
  possible without the change of meaning lying at the root of it, is


  indeed a production of that psychic and psychophysical reciprocal

  action out of which the development of language takes place.”

Jodl[23] denies the identity of language and thought, because, for one
reason, one and the same psychic fact might be expressed in different
languages in different ways. From that he draws the conclusion that a
“super-language thinking” exists. Certainly there is such a thing,
whether with Erdmann one considers it “hypologisch,” or with Jodl as
“super-language.” Only this is not logical thinking. My conception of it
agrees with the noteworthy contribution made by Baldwin, which I will
quote here word for word.[24]

  “The transmission from pre-judgmental to judgmental meaning is just


  that from knowledge which has social confirmation to that which gets

  along without it. The meanings utilized for judgment are those already


  developed in their presuppositions and applications through the

  confirmation of social intercourse. Thus, the personal judgment,
  trained in the methods of social rendering, and disciplined by the
  interaction of its social world, projects its content into that world
  again. In other words, the platform for all movement into the
  assertion of individual judgment—the level from which new experience
  is utilized—is already and always socialized; and it is just this


  movement that we find reflected in the actual results as the sense of

  the ‘appropriateness’ or synomic character of the meaning rendered.

  “Now the development of thought, as we are to see in more detail, is
  by a method essentially of trial and error, of experimentation, of the


  use of meanings as worth more than they are as yet recognized to be

  worth. The individual must use his own thoughts, his established
  knowledges, his grounded judgments, for the embodiment of his new
  inventive constructions. He erects his thought as we say
  ‘schematically’—in logic terms, ‘problematically,’ conditionally,
  disjunctively; projecting into the world an opinion still peculiar to
  himself, as if it were true. _Thus all discovery proceeds._ But this
  is, from the linguistic point of view, still to use the current
  language, still to work by meanings already embodied in social and
  conventional usage.

  “Language grows, therefore, just as thought does, by never losing its
  synomic or dual reference; its meaning is both personal and social.

  “It is the register of tradition, the record of racial conquest, the
  deposit of all the gains made by the genius of individuals.... The
  social copy-system, thus established, reflects the judgmental
  processes of the race, and in turn becomes the training school of the
  judgment of new generations.

  “Most of the training of the self, whereby the vagaries of personal
  reaction to fact and image are reduced to the basis of sound judgment,
  comes through the use of speech. When the child speaks, he lays before
  the world his suggestion for a general or common meaning. The
  reception he gets confirms or refutes him. In either case he is
  instructed. His next venture is now from a platform of knowledge on


  which the newer item is more nearly convertible into the common coin

  of effective intercourse. The point to notice here is not so much the
  exact mechanism of the exchange—secondary conversion—by which this
  gain is made, as the training in judgment that the constant use of it
  affords. In each case, effective judgment is the common judgment.

  “Here the object is to point out that it is secured by the development
  of a function _whose rise is directly ad hoc_, directly for the social


  experimentation by which growth in personal competence is advanced as

  well—_the function of speech_.

  “In language, therefore, to sum up the foregoing, we have the
  tangible—the actual—the historical—instrument of the development and
  conservation of psychic meaning. It is the material evidence and proof
  of the _concurrence of social and personal judgment_. In it synomic
  meaning, judged as ‘appropriate,’ becomes ‘social’ meaning, held as
  socially generalized and acknowledged.”

These arguments of Baldwin abundantly emphasize the wide-reaching
limitations of thinking caused by language.[25] These limitations are of
the greatest significance, both subjectively and objectively; at least
their meaning is great enough to force one to ask one’s self if, after
all, in regard to independence of thought, Franz Mauthner, thoroughly
sceptical, is not really correct in his view that thinking is speech and
nothing more. Baldwin expresses himself more cautiously and reservedly;
nevertheless, his inner meaning is plainly in favor of the primacy of
speech (naturally not in the sense of the spoken word); the directed
thinking, or as we might perhaps call it, the thinking in internal
speech, is the manifest instrument of culture, and we do not go astray


when we say that the powerful work of education which the centuries have

given to directed thinking has produced, just through the peculiar


development of thinking from the individual subjective into the social

objective, a practical application of the human mind to which we owe
modern empiricism and technic, and which occurs for absolutely the first
time in the history of the world. Inquisitive minds have often tormented


themselves with the question why the undoubtedly extraordinary knowledge


of mathematics and principles and material facts united with the


unexampled art of the human hand in antiquity never arrived at the point

of developing those known technical statements of fact, for instance,
the principles of simple machines, beyond the realm of the amusing and
curious to a real technic in the modern sense. There is necessarily only
one answer to this; the ancients almost entirely, with the exception of
a few extraordinary minds, lacked the capacity to allow their interest