                 Was her blue eyes looking at him,
                 Two blue lakes among the rushes.”

The comparison with water is not a matter of secondary importance,
because “from wind and water” shall man be born anew.

                “And he wooed her with caresses,
                Wooed her with his smile of sunshine,
                With his flattering words he wooed her,
                With his sighing and his singing,
                Gentlest whispers in the branches,
                Softest music, sweetest odors,” etc.

In these onomatopoetic verses the wind’s caressing courtship is
excellently expressed.[635]

The third song presents the previous history of Hiawatha’s mother. His
grandmother, when a maiden, lived in the moon. There she once swung upon
a liana, but a jealous lover cut off the liana, and Nokomis, Hiawatha’s
grandmother, fell to earth. The people, who saw her fall downwards,
thought that she was a _shooting star_. This marvellous descent of


Nokomis is more plainly illustrated by a later passage of this same

song; there little Hiawatha asks the grandmother what is the moon.
Nokomis teaches him about it as follows: The moon is the body of a
_grandmother_, whom a warlike grandson has cast up there in wrath. Hence
the moon is the _grandmother_. In ancient beliefs, the moon is also the
gathering place of departed souls,[636] the guardian of seeds;
therefore, once more a place of the origin of life of predominantly
feminine significance. The remarkable thing is that Nokomis, falling
upon the earth, gave birth to a daughter, Wenonah, subsequently the
mother of Hiawatha. The throwing upwards of the mother, and her falling
down and bringing forth, seems to contain something typical in itself.


Thus a story of the seventeenth century relates that a mad bull threw a

pregnant woman as high as a house, and tore open her womb, and the child
fell without harm upon the earth. On account of his wonderful birth,
this child was considered a hero or doer of miracles, but he died at an
early age. The belief is widespread among lower savages that the sun is
feminine and the moon masculine. Among the Namaqua, a Hottentot tribe,
the opinion is prevalent that the sun consists of transparent bacon.

  “The people, who journey on boats, draw it down by magic every
  evening, cut off a suitable piece and then give it _a kick so that it
  flies up again into the sky_.”—_Waitz_: “Anthropologie,” II, 342.

The infantile nourishment comes from the mother. In the Gnostic


phantasies we come across a legend of the origin of man which possibly

belongs here: the female archons bound to the vault of Heaven are
unable, on account of its quick rotation, to keep their young within
them, but let them fall upon the earth, from which men arise. Possibly
there is here a connection with barbaric midwifery, the letting fall of
the parturient. The assault upon the mother is already introduced with
the adventure of Mudjekeewis, and is continued in the violent handling
of the “grandmother,” Nokomis, who, as a result of the cutting of the
liana and the fall downwards, seems in some way to have become pregnant.
The “cutting of the branch,” the plucking, we have already recognized as
mother incest. (See above.) That well-known verse, “Saxonland, where
beautiful maidens grow upon trees,” and phrases like “picking cherries
in a neighbor’s garden,” allude to a similar idea. The fall downwards of
Nokomis deserves to be compared to a poetical figure in Heine.

                    “A star, a star is falling
                      Out of the glittering sky!
                    The star of Love! I watch it
                      Sink in the depths and die.

                    “The leaves and buds are falling
                      From many an apple-tree;


                    I watch the mirthful breezes

                      Embrace them wantonly...”

Wenonah later was courted by the caressing West Wind, and becomes
pregnant. Wenonah, as a young moon-goddess, has the beauty of the
moonlight. Nokomis warns her of the dangerous courtship of Mudjekeewis,
the West Wind. But Wenonah allows herself to become infatuated, and
conceives from the breath of the wind, from the πνεῦμα, a son, our hero.

                 “And the West-Wind came at evening,

                        ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

                 Found the beautiful Wenonah,
                 Lying there amid the lilies,
                 Wooed her with his words of sweetness,
                 Wooed her with his soft caresses,
                 Till she bore a son in sorrow,
                 Bore a son of love and sorrow.”

Fertilization through the breath of the spirit is already a well-known
precedent for us. The star or comet plainly belongs to the birth scene
as a libido symbol; Nokomis, too, comes to earth as a shooting star.
Mörike’s sweet poetic phantasy has devised a similar divine origin.

               “And she who bore me in her womb,
                 And gave me food and clothing.
               She was a maid—a wild, brown maid,
                 Who looked on men with loathing.

               “She fleered at them and laughed out loud,
                 And bade no suitor tarry;
               ‘I’d rather be the Wind’s own bride
                 Than have a man and marry.’

               “Then came the Wind and held her fast
                 His captive, love-enchanted;
               And lo, by him a merry child
                 Within her womb was planted.”

Buddha’s marvellous birth story, retold by Sir Edwin Arnold, also shows
traces of this.[637]

       “Maya, the Queen ...
       Dreamed a strange dream, dreamed that a star from heaven—
       Splendid, six-rayed, in color rosy-pearl,


       Whereof the token was an Elephant

       Six-tusked and white as milk of Kamadhuk—
       Shot through the void; and shining into her,
       Entered her womb upon the right.”[638]

During Maya’s conception a wind blows over the land:

                                      “A wind blew
              With unknown freshness over lands and seas.”

After the birth the four genii of the East, West, South and North come
to render service as bearers of the palanquin. (The coming of the wise
men at Christ’s birth.) We also find here a distinct reference to the
“four winds.” For the completion of the symbolism there is to be found
in the Buddha myth, as well as in the birth legend of Christ, besides
the impregnation by star and wind, also the fertilization by an animal,
here an elephant, which with its phallic trunk fulfilled in Maya the
Christian method of fructification through the ear or the head. It is
well known that, in addition to the dove, the unicorn is also a
procreative symbol of the Logos.


Here arises the question why the birth of a hero always had to take

place under such strange symbolic circumstances? It might also be


imagined that a hero arose from ordinary surroundings and gradually grew

out of his inferior environment, perhaps with a thousand troubles and
dangers. (And, indeed, this motive is by no means strange in the hero
myth.) It might be said that superstition demands strange conditions of
birth and generation; but why does it demand them?

The answer to this question is: that the birth of the hero, as a rule,
is not that of an ordinary mortal, but is a rebirth from the
mother-spouse; hence it occurs under mysterious ceremonies. Therefore,
in the very beginning, lies the motive of the two mothers of the hero.
As Rank[639] has shown us through many examples, the hero is often
obliged to experience exposure, and upbringing by foster parents, and in
this manner he acquires the two mothers. A striking example is the
relation of Hercules to Hera. In the Hiawatha epic Wenonah dies after
the birth and Nokomis takes her place. Maya dies after the birth[640]
and Buddha is given a stepmother. The stepmother is sometimes an animal
(the she-wolf of Romulus and Remus, etc.). The twofold mother may be
replaced by the motive of twofold birth, which has attained a lofty
significance in the Christian mythology; namely, through baptism, which,
as we have seen, represents rebirth. Thus man is born not merely in a
commonplace manner, but also born again in a mysterious manner, by means
of which he becomes a participator of the kingdom of God, of
immortality. Any one may become a hero in this way who is generated anew
through his own mother, because only through her does he share in
immortality. Therefore, it happened that the death of Christ on the
cross, which creates universal salvation, was understood as “baptism”;
that is to say, as rebirth through the second mother, the mysterious
tree of death. Christ says:

  “But I have a baptism to be baptized with: and how am I straitened
  till it be accomplished!”—_Luke_ xii: 50.

He interprets his death agony symbolically as birth agony.

The motive of the two mothers suggests the thought of self-rejuvenation,
and evidently expresses the fulfilment of the wish that it _might be
possible for the mother to bear me again_; at the same time, applied to
the heroes, it means one is a hero who is borne again by her who has
previously been his mother; that is to say, _a hero is he who may again
produce himself through his mother_.


The countless suggestions in the history of the procreation of the

heroes indicate the latter formulations. Hiawatha’s father first
overpowered the mother under the symbol of the bear; then himself
becoming a god, he procreates the hero. What Hiawatha had to do as hero,
Nokomis hinted to him in the legend of the origin of the moon; he is
forcibly to throw his mother upwards (or throw downwards?); then she


would become pregnant by this act of violence and could bring forth a

daughter. This rejuvenated mother would be allotted, according to the
Egyptian rite, as a daughter-wife to the sun-god, the father of his
mother, for self-reproduction. What action Hiawatha takes in this regard
we shall see presently. We have already studied the behavior of the
pre-Asiatic gods related to Christ. Concerning the pre-existence of
Christ, the Gospel of St. John is full of this thought. Thus the speech
of John the Baptist:

  “This is he of whom I said, After me cometh a man which is preferred
  before me; for he was before me.”—_John_ i: 30.


Also the beginning of the gospel is full of deep mythologic

significance:

  “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
  Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God.

  (3) “All things were made by him, and without him was not anything
  made that was made.

  (4) “In him was life, and the _life_ was the _light of men_.

  (5) “And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehendeth
  it not.

  (6) “There was a man sent from God whose name was John.

  (7) “The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light.

  (8) “He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that
  Light.

  (9) “That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh
  into the world.”

This is the proclamation of the reappearing light, the reborn sun, which
formerly was, and which will be again. In the baptistry at Pisa, Christ
is represented bringing the tree of life to man; his head is surrounded
by a sun halo. Over this relief stand the words INTROITUS SOLIS.

Because the one born was his own procreator, the history of his
procreation is strangely concealed under symbolic events, which are
meant to conceal and deny it; hence the extraordinary assertion of the
virgin conception. This is meant to hide the incestuous impregnation.
But do not let us forget that this naïve assertion plays an unusually
important part in the ingenious symbolic bridge, which is to guide the


libido out from the incestuous bond to higher and more useful