mythology. It is brought to this refined state by the influence of the
corrector of reality.[818] We have emphasized the fact that in the
Miller drama the horse is the first to die, as the animal brother of the
hero. (Corresponding to the early death of the half-animal Eabani, the
brother friend of Gilgamesh.) This sacrificial death recalls the whole
category of mythological animal sacrifices. Volumes could be filled with
parallels, but we must limit ourselves here to suggestions. The
sacrificial animal, where it has lost the primitive meaning of the
simple sacrificial gift, and has taken a higher religious significance,
stands in a close relation to both the hero and the divinity. The animal
represents the god himself;[819] thus the bull[820] represents Zagreus,
Dionysus and Mithra; the lamb represents Christ,[821] etc. As we are
aware, the animal symbols represent the animal libido. The sacrifice of
the animal means, therefore, the sacrifice of the animal nature. This is
most clearly expressed in the religious legend of Attis. Attis is the
son lover of the divine mother, Agdistis Cybele. Agdistis was
characteristically androgynous,[822] as symbol of the mother-libido,
like the tree; really a clear indication that the mother-imago has in


addition to the significance of the likeness of the real mother the

meaning of the mother of humanity, the libido in general. Driven mad by
the insanity-breeding mother enamored of him, he emasculates himself,
and that under a pine tree. (The pine tree plays an important rôle in
his service. Every year a pine tree was wreathed about and upon it an
image of Attis was hung, and then it was cut down, which represents the
castration.) The blood, which spurted to the earth, was transformed into
budding violets. Cybele now took this pine tree, bore it into her cavern
and there wept over it. (Pietà.) The chthonic mother takes her son with
her into the cavern—namely, into the womb—according to another version.
Attis was transformed into the pine tree. The tree here has an
essentially phallic meaning; on the contrary, the attaching of the image
of Attis to the tree refers also to the maternal meaning. (“To be
attached to the mother.”) In Ovid (“Metamorphoses,” Book X) the pine
tree is spoken of as follows:

           “Grata deum matri, siquidem Cybeleius Attis
           Exuit hac hominem, truncoque induruit illo.”[823]


The transformation into the pine tree is evidently a burial in the

mother, just as Osiris was overgrown by the heather. Upon the Attis
bas-relief of Coblenz Attis appears _growing out of a tree_, which is
interpreted by Mannhardt as the “life-principle” of vegetation inherent
in the tree. It is probably a tree birth, just as with Mithra. (Relief
of Heddernheim.) As Firmicus observes, in the Isis and Osiris cult and
also in the cult of the virgin Persephone, tree and image had played a
rôle.[824] Dionysus had the surname Dendrites, and in Boeotia he is said
to have been called ἔνδενδρος, meaning “in a tree.” (At the birth of
Dionysus, Megaira planted the pine tree on the Kithairon.) The Pentheus


myth bound up with the Dionysus legend furnishes the remarkable and

supplementary counterpart to the death of Attis, and the subsequent
lamentation. Pentheus,[825] curious to espy the orgies of the Maenades,
_climbed upon a pine tree_, but he was observed by his mother; the
Maenades cut down the tree, and Pentheus, taken for an animal, was torn
by them in frenzy,[826] his own mother being the first to rush upon him.
In this myth the phallic meaning of the tree (cutting down, castration)
and its maternal significance (mounting and the sacrificial death of the
son) is present; at the same time the supplementary counterpart to the
Pietà is apparent, the “terrible mother.” The feast of Attis was
celebrated as a lamentation and then as a joy in the spring. (Good
Friday and Easter.) The priests of Attis-Cybele worship were often
eunuchs, and were called Galloi.[827] The archigallus was called Atys
(Attis).[828] Instead of the animal castration, the priests merely
scratched their arms until they bled. (Arm in place of phallus, “the
twisting of arms.”) A similar symbolism of the sacrificial impulse is
met in the Mithraic religion, where essential parts of the mysteries
consist in the catching and the subduing of the bull.

A parallel figure to Mithra is the primitive man Gayomard. He was
created together with his bull, and the two lived for six thousand years
in a blissful state. But when the world came into the cycle of the
seventh sign of the Zodiac (Libra) the evil principle entered. Libra is
astrologically the so-called positive domicile of Venus; the evil
principle, therefore, came under the dominion of the goddess of love
(destruction of the sun-hero through the mother-wife—snake, whore, etc).
As a result, after thirty years, Gayomard and his bull died. (The trials
of Zartusht lasted also thirty years; compare the span of Christ’s
life.) Fifty-five species of grain came from the dead bull, twelve kinds
of salubrious plants, etc. The sperma of the bull entered into the moon
for purification, but the sperma of Gayomard entered into the sun. This
circumstance possibly suggests a rather feminine meaning of bull. Gosh
or Drvâçpa is the soul of the bull, and was worshipped as a female
divinity. She would not, at first, from diffidence, become the goddess
of the herds, until the coming of Zarathustra was announced to her as
consolation. This has its parallel in the Hindoo Purâna, where the
coming of Krishna was promised the earth. (A complete analogy to
Christ.[829]) She, too, travels in her chariot, like Ardvîçûra, the
goddess of love. The soul of the bull is, therefore, decidedly feminine.


This myth of Gayomard repeats only in an altered form the primitive

conception of the closed ring of a male-female divinity, self-begetting
and forth-bringing.

Like the sacrificial bull, the fire, the sacrifice of which we have
already discussed in Chapter III, has a feminine nature among the
Chinese, according to the commentaries[830] of the philosopher
Tschwang-Tse:

  “The spirit of the hearth is called Ki. He is clad in bright red,
  which resembles fire, and appears as a lovely, attractive maiden.”

In the “Book of Rites” it is said:

  “Wood is burned in the flames for the spirit of Au. This sacrifice to
  Au is a sacrifice to old departed women.”


These spirits of the hearth and fire are the souls of departed cooks

and, therefore, are called “old women.” The kitchen god develops from
this pre-Buddhistic tradition and becomes later (male sex) the ruler of
the family and the _mediator between family and god_. Thus the old
feminine fire spirit becomes a species of Logos. (Compare with this the
remarks in Chapter III.)

From the bull’s sperma the progenitors of the cattle came, as well as
two hundred and seventy-two species of useful animals. According to
Mînôkhired, Gayomard had destroyed the Dév Azûr, who was considered the
demon of evil appetites.[831] In spite of the efforts of Zarathustra,
this demon remained longest on the earth. He was destroyed at last at
the resurrection, like Satan in the Apocalypse of John. In another


version it is said that Angromainyus and the serpent were left until the

last, so as to be destroyed by Ahuramazda himself. According to a
surmise by Kern, Zarathustra may mean “golden-star” and be identical
with Mithra. Mithra’s name is connected with neo-Persian _Mihr_, which
means “sun and love.”

In Zagreus we see that the bull is also identical with the god; hence
the bull sacrifice is a god sacrifice, but on a primitive stage. The
animal symbol is, so to speak, only a part of the hero; he sacrifices
only his animal; therefore, symbolically, renounces only his animal
nature. The internal participation in the sacrifice[832] is expressed
excellently in the anguished ecstatic countenance of the bull-slaying
Mithra. He does it willingly and unwillingly[833] hence the somewhat
hysterical expression which has some similarity to the well-known
mawkish countenance of the Crucified of Guido Reni. Benndorf says:[834]

  “The features, which, especially in the upper portion, bear an
  absolutely ideal character, have an extremely morbid expression.”

Cumont[835] himself says of the facial expression of the Tauroctonos:

  “The countenance, which may be seen in the best reproductions, is that
  of a young man of an almost feminine beauty; the head has a quantity
  of curly hair, which, rising up from the forehead, surrounds him as
  with a halo; the head is slightly tilted backwards, so that the glance
  is directed towards the heavens, and the contraction of the brows and
  the lips give a strange expression of sorrow to the face.”[836]

The Ostian head of Mithra Tauroctonos, illustrated in Cumont, has,
indeed, an expression which we recognize in our patients as one of
sentimental resignation. _Sentimentality is repressed brutality._ Hence
the exceedingly sentimental pose, which had its counterpart in the
symbolism of the shepherd and the lamb of contemporaneous Christianity,
with the addition of infantilism.[837]

Meanwhile, it is only his animal nature which the god sacrifices; that
is to say, his sexuality,[838] always in close analogy to the course of
the sun. We have learned in the course of this investigation that the


part of the libido which erects religious structures is in the last

analysis fixed in the mother, and really represents that tie through
which we are permanently connected with our origin. Briefly, we may
designate this amount of libido as “Mother Libido.” As we have seen,
this libido conceals itself in countless and very heterogeneous symbols,
also in animal images, no matter whether of masculine or feminine
nature—differences of sex are at bottom of a secondary value and


psychologically do not play the part which might be expected from a

superficial observation.


The annual sacrifice of the maiden to the dragon probably represented

the most ideal symbolic situation. In order to pacify the anger of the
“terrible mother” the most beautiful woman was sacrificed as symbol of
man’s libido. Less vivid examples are the sacrifice of the first-born
and various valuable domestic animals. A second ideal case is the
self-castration in the service of the mother (Dea Syria, etc.), a less
obvious form of which is circumcision. By that at least only a portion
is sacrificed.[839] With these sacrifices, the object of which in ideal
cases is to symbolize the libido drawing away from the mother, life is
symbolically renounced in order to regain it. By the sacrifice man


ransoms himself from the fear of death and reconciles the destroying