brothers nor sisters, but they represent hostile, destroying powers, to
which we are abandoned the more surely, the more childishly and
thoughtlessly we have entrusted ourselves to the so-called Fatherly hand
of God. One should never forget the harsh speech of the first Napoleon,
that the good God is always on the side of the heaviest artillery.


The religious myth meets us here as one of the greatest and most

significant human institutions which, despite misleading symbols,
nevertheless gives man assurance and strength, so that he may not be
overwhelmed by the monsters of the universe. The symbol, considered from
the standpoint of actual truth, is misleading, indeed, but it is
_psychologically true_,[466] because it was and is the bridge to all the
greatest achievements of humanity.


But this does not mean to say that this unconscious way of


transformation of the incest wish into religious exercises is the only

one or the only possible one. There is also a conscious recognition and


understanding with which we can take possession of this libido which is


bound up in incest and transformed into religious exercises so that we

no longer need the stage of religious symbolism for this end. It is
thinkable that instead of doing good to our fellow-men, for “the love of
Christ,” we do it from the knowledge that humanity, even as ourselves,
could not exist if, among the herd, the one could not sacrifice himself
for the other. _This would be the course of moral autonomy, of perfect
freedom, when man could without compulsion wish that which he must do,
and this from knowledge, without delusion through belief in the
religious symbols._

It is a positive creed which keeps us infantile and, therefore,
ethically inferior. Although of the greatest significance from the
cultural point of view and of imperishable beauty from the æsthetic
standpoint, this delusion can no longer ethically suffice humanity
striving after moral autonomy.


The infantile and moral danger lies in belief in the symbol because

through that we guide the libido to an imaginary reality. The simple
negation of the symbol changes nothing, for the entire mental
disposition remains the same; we merely remove the dangerous object. But
the object is not dangerous; the danger is our own infantile mental
state, for love of which we have lost something very beautiful and
ingenious through the simple abandonment of the religious symbol. I
think _belief should be replaced by understanding_; then we would keep
the beauty of the symbol, but still remain free from the depressing
results of submission to belief. This would be the psychoanalytic cure
for belief and disbelief.


The vision following upon that of the city is that of a “strange fir
tree with gnarled branches.” This vision does not seem extraordinary to


us after all that we have learned of the tree of life and its

associations with the city and the waters of life. This especial tree
seems simply to continue the category of the mother symbols. The
attribute “strange” probably signifies, as in dreams, a special
emphasis, that is, a special underlying complex material. Unfortunately,
the author gives us no individual material for this. As the tree already


suggested in the symbolism of the city is particularly emphasized

through the further development of Miss Miller’s visions here, I find it


necessary to discuss at some length the history of the symbolism of the

tree.


It is well known that trees have played a large part in the cult myth

from the remotest times. The typical myth tree is the tree of paradise


or of life which we discover abundantly used in Babylonian and also in

Jewish lore; and in prechristian times, the pine tree of Attis, the tree
or trees of Mithra; in Germanic mythology, Ygdrasil and so on. The
hanging of the Attis image on the pine tree; the hanging of Marsyas,
which became a celebrated artistic motive; the hanging of Odin; the
Germanic hanging sacrifices—indeed, the whole series of hanged
gods—teaches us that the hanging of Christ on the cross is not a unique
occurrence in religious mythology, but belongs to the same circle of
ideas as others. In this world of imagery the cross of Christ is the
tree of life, and equally the wood of death. This contrast is not
astounding. Just as the origin of man from trees was a legendary idea,
so there were also burial customs, in which people were buried in hollow
trees. From that the German language retains even now the expression
“Totenbaum” (tree of death) for a coffin. Keeping in mind the fact that
the tree is predominantly a mother symbol, then the mystic significance
of this manner of burial can be in no way incomprehensible to us. _The
dead are delivered back to the mother for rebirth._ We encounter this
symbol in the Osiris myth, handed down by Plutarch,[467] which is, in
general, typical in various aspects. Rhea is pregnant with Osiris; at
the same time also with Isis; Osiris and Isis mate even in the mother’s
womb (motive of the night journey on the sea with incest). Their son is
Arueris, later called Horus. It is said of Isis that she was born “in
absolute humidity” (τετάρτῃ δὲ τῆν Ἴσιν ἐν πανύγροις γενέσθαι[468]). It


is said of Osiris that a certain Pamyles in Thebes heard a voice from

the temple of Zeus while drawing water, which commanded him to proclaim
that Osiris was born μέγας βασιλεὺς εὐεργέτης Ὄσιρις.[469] In honor of
this the Pamylion were celebrated. They were similar to the
phallophorion. Pamyles is a phallic demon, similar to the original
Dionysus. The myth reduced reads: Osiris and Isis were generated by
phallus from the water (mother womb) in the ordinary manner. (Kronos had
made Rhea pregnant, the relation was secret, and Rhea was his sister.
Helios, however, observed it and cursed the relation.) Osiris was killed
in a crafty manner by the god of the underworld, Typhon, who locked him
in a chest. He was thrown into the Nile, and so carried out to sea.
Osiris, however, mated in the underworld with his second sister,
Nephthys (motive of the night journey to the sea with incest). One sees
here how the symbolism is developed. In the mother womb, before the
outward existence, Osiris commits incest; in death, the second
intrauterine existence, Osiris again commits incest. Both times with a
sister who is simply substituted for the mother as a legal, uncensured
symbol, since the marriage with a sister in early antiquity was not
merely tolerated, but was really commended. Zarathustra also recommended
the marriage of kindred. This form of myth would be impossible to-day,
because cohabitation with the sister, being incestuous, would be
repressed. The wicked Typhon entices Osiris craftily into a box or
chest; this distortion of the true state of affairs is transparent. The
“original sin” caused men to wish to go back into the mother again, that
is, the incestuous desire for the mother, condemned by law, is the ruse
supposedly invented by Typhon. The fact is, the ruse is very
significant. Man tries to sneak into rebirth through subterfuge in order
to become a child again. An early Egyptian hymn[470] even raises an
accusation against the mother Isis because she destroys the sun-god Rê
by treachery. It was interpreted as the ill-will of the mother towards
her son that she banished and betrayed him. The hymn describes how Isis
fashioned a snake, put it in the path of Rê, and how the snake wounded
the sun-god with a poisonous bite, from which wound he never recovered,
so that finally he had to retire on the back of the heavenly cow. But
this cow is the cow-headed goddess, just as Osiris is the bull Apis. The


mother is accused as if she were the cause of man flying to the mother

in order to be cured of the wound which she had herself inflicted. This
wound is the prohibition of incest.[471] Man is thus cut off from the
hopeful certainty of childhood and early youth, from all the
unconscious, instinctive happenings which permit the child to live as an
appendage of his parents, unconscious of himself. There must be
contained in this many sensitive memories of the animal age, where there
was not any “thou shalt” and “thou shalt not,” but all was just simple
occurrence. Even yet a deep animosity seems to live in man because a


brutal law has separated him from the instinctive yielding to his

desires and from the great beauty of the harmony of the animal nature.
This separation manifested itself, among other things, in the incest
prohibition and its correlates (laws of marriage, etc.); therefore pain
and anger relate to the mother, as if she were responsible for the
domestication of the sons of men. In order not to become conscious of
his incest wish (his backward harking to the animal nature), the son
throws all the burden of the guilt on the mother, from which arises the
idea of the “terrible mother.”[472] The mother becomes for him a spectre
of anxiety, a nightmare.[473]

After the completed “night journey to the sea,” the chest of Osiris was
cast ashore by Byblos, and lay in the branches of an Erica, which grew
around the coffin and became a splendid tree. The king of the land had
the tree placed as a column under his roof.[474] During this period of
Osiris’s absence (the winter solstice) the lament customary during
thousands of years for the dead god and his return occurs, and its
εὕρεσις is a feast of joy. A passage from the mournful quest of Isis is
especially noteworthy:

  “She flutters like a swallow lamenting around the column, which
  encloses the god sleeping in death.”

(This same motive returns in the Kyffhäuser saga.)

[Illustration: FRUCTIFICATION FOLLOWING UPON THE MITHRAIC SACRIFICE]

Later on Typhon dismembers the corpse and scatters the pieces. We come
upon the _motive of dismemberment_ in countless sun myths,[475] namely,


the inversion of the idea of the composition of the child in the

mother’s womb.[476] In fact, the mother Isis collects the pieces of the
body with the help of the jackal-headed Anubis. (She finds the corpse
with the help of dogs.) Here the nocturnal devourers of bodies, the dogs
and jackals, become the assistants of the composition, of the
reproduction.[477] The Egyptian vulture owes its symbolic meaning as
mother to this necrophagic habit. In Persian antiquity the corpses were
thrown out for the dogs to devour, just as to-day in the Indian funeral
pyres the removal of the carcasses is left to the vultures. Persia was
familiar with the custom of leading a dog to the bed of one dying,
whereupon the latter had to present the dog with a morsel.[478] The
custom, on its surface, evidently signifies that the morsel is to belong
to the dog, so that he will spare the body of the dead, precisely as
Cerberus was soothed by the honey-cakes which Hercules gave to him in
the journey to hell. But when we bear in mind the jackal-headed Anubis


who rendered his good services in the gathering together of the

dismembered Osiris, and the mother significance of the vulture, then the
question arises whether something deeper was not meant by this ceremony.
Creuzer has also concerned himself with this idea, and has come to the
conclusion that the astral form of the dog ceremony, that is, the
appearance of Sirius, the dog star, at the period of the sun’s highest
position, is related to this in that the introduction of the dog has a
compensatory significance, death being thereby made, reversedly, equal
to the sun’s highest position. This is quite in conformity with
psychologic thought, which results from the very general fact that death
is interpreted as entrance into the mother’s womb (rebirth). This


interpretation would seem to be supported by the otherwise enigmatic

function of the dog in the Sacrificium Mithriacum. In the monuments a
dog always leaps up upon the bull killed by Mithra. However, this
sacrifice is probably to be interpreted through the Persian legend, as
well as through the monument, as the moment of the _highest fecundity_.


The most beautiful expression of this is seen upon the magnificent