psychoanalysis as a method of treatment. In practical analysis it is
important, first of all, to discover the libido lost from the control of
consciousness. (It often happens to the libido as with the fish of Moses
in the Mohammedan legend; it sometimes “takes its course in a marvellous
manner into the sea.”) Freud says in his important article, “Zur Dynamik
der Übertragung”:[784]

  “The libido has retreated into regression and again revives the
  infantile images.”

This means, mythologically, that the sun is devoured by the serpent of
the night, the treasure is concealed and guarded by the dragon:
substitution of a present mode of adaptation by an infantile mode, which
is represented by the corresponding neurotic symptoms. Freud continues:

  “Thither the analytic treatment follows it and endeavors to seek out
  the libido again, to render it accessible to consciousness, and
  finally to make it serviceable to reality. Whenever the analytic
  investigation touches upon the libido, withdrawn into its
  hiding-place, a struggle must break out; all the forces, which have
  caused the regression of the libido, will rise up as resistance
  against the work, in order to preserve this new condition.”

Mythologically this means: the hero seeks the lost sun, the fire, the
virgin sacrifice, or the treasure, and fights the typical fight with the
dragon, with the libido in resistance. As these parallels show,
psychoanalysis mobiles a part of the life processes, the fundamental


importance of which properly illustrates the significance of this

process.

After Siegfried has slain the dragon, he meets the father, Wotan,
plagued by gloomy cares, for the primitive mother, Erda, has placed in
his path the snake, in order to enfeeble his sun. He says to Erda:

               _Wanderer_:

               All-wise one,
               Care’s piercing sting by thee was planted
               In Wotan’s dauntless heart
               With fear of shameful ruin and downfall.


               Filled was his spirit by tidings

               Thou didst foretell.
               Art thou the world’s wisest of women?


               Tell to me now

               How a god may conquer his care.

               _Erda_:


               Thou art not

               What thou hast said.

It is the same primitive motive which we meet Wagner: the mother has
robbed her son, the sun-god, of the joy of life, through a poisonous
thorn, and deprives him of his power, which is connected with the name.
Isis demands the name of the god; Erda says, “Thou art not what thou
hast said.” But the “Wanderer” has found the way to conquer the fatal
charm of the mother, the fear of death:

                  “The eternals’ downfall
                  No more dismays me,
                  Since their doom I willed.

                  “I leave to thee, loveliest Wälsung,
                  Gladly my heritage now.
                  To the ever-young
                  In gladness yieldeth the god!”

These wise words contain, in fact, the saving thought. It is not the
mother who has placed the poisonous worm in our path, but our libido


itself wills to complete the course of the sun to mount from morn to

noon, and, passing beyond noon, to hasten towards evening, not at war
with itself, but willing the descent and the end.[785]

Nietzsche’s Zarathustra teaches:

  “I praise thee, my death, the free death, which comes to me because I
  want it.

  “And when shall I want it?

  “He who has a goal and an heir wants death at the proper time for his
  goal and his heir.

  “And this is the great noonday, when man in the middle of his course
  stands between man and superman, and celebrates his path towards
  evening as his highest hope: because it is the path to a new morning.

  “He who is setting will bless his own going down because it is a
  transition: and the sun of his knowledge will be at high noon.”

Siegfried conquers the father Wotan and takes possession of Brunhilde.
The first object that he sees is her horse; then he believes that he
beholds a mail-clad man. He cuts to pieces the protecting coat of mail
of the sleeper. (Overpowering.) When he sees it is a woman, terror
seizes him:

                  “My heart doth falter and faint;


                  On whom shall I call

                  That he may help me?
                  Mother! Mother!
                  Remember me!

                  “Can this be fearing?
                  Oh, mother! Mother!
                  Thy dauntless child!
                  A woman lieth asleep:—
                  And she now has taught him to fear!

                  “Awaken! Awaken!
                  Holiest maid!


                  Then life from the sweetness of lips

                  Will I win me—
                  E’en tho’ I die in a kiss.”

In the duet which follows the mother is invoked:

                       “O mother, hail!
                       Who gave thee thy birth!”

The confession of Brunhilde is especially characteristic:

                   “O knewest thou—joy of the world,
                   How I have ever loved thee!
                   Thou wert my gladness,
                   My care wert thou!
                   Thy life I sheltered;
                   Or ere it was thine,
                   Or ere thou wert born,
                   My shield was thy guard.”[786]

The pre-existence of the hero and the pre-existence of Brunhilde as his
wife-mother are clearly indicated from this passage.

Siegfried says in confirmation:

                    “Then death took not my mother?
                    Bound in sleep did she lie?”

The mother-imago, which is the symbol of the dying and resurrected
libido, is explained by Brunhilde to the hero, as his own will:

                      “Thyself am I
                      If blest I be in thy love.”


The great mystery of the Logos entering into the mother for rebirth is

proclaimed with the following words by Brunhilde:

                   “O Siegfried, Siegfried,
                   Conquering light!
                   I loved thee ever,


                   For I divined

                   The thought that Wotan had hidden—


                   The thought that I dared

                   Not to whisper—[787]


                   That all unclearly


                   Glowed in my bosom

                   Suffered and strove;


                   For which I flouted

                   Him, who conceived it:[787]


                   For which in penance

                   Prisoned I lay,


                   While thinking it not

                   And feeling only,
                   For, in my thought,
                   Oh, should you guess it?
                   Was only my love for thee.”


The erotic similes which now follow distinctly reveal the motive of

rebirth:

                   _Siegfried_:
                     “A glorious flood
                     Before me rolls.


                     With all my senses


                     I only see

                     Its buoyant, gladdening billows.


                     Though in the deep

                     I find not my face,
                     Burning, I long
                     For the water’s balm;
                     And now as I am,
                     Spring in the stream.[788]


                     O might its billows

                     Engulf me in bliss.”

The motive of plunging into the maternal water of rebirth (baptism) is
here fully developed. An allusion to the “terrible mother” imago, the
mother of heroes, who teaches them fear, is to be found in Brunhilde’s
words (the horse-woman, who guides the dead to the other side):

                       “Fearest thou, Siegfried?


                       Fearest thou not

                       The wild, furious woman?”

The orgiastic “Occide moriturus” resounds in Brunhilde’s words:

                      “Laughing let us be lost—
                      Laughing go down to death!”


And in the words

                          “Light-giving love,
                          Laughing death!”

is to be found the same significant contrast.

The further destinies of Siegfried are those of the Invictus: the spear
of the gloomy, one-eyed Hagen strikes Siegfried’s vulnerable spot. The
old sun, who has become the god of death, the one-eyed Wotan, smites his
offspring, and once again ascends in eternal rejuvenation. The course of


the invincible sun has supplied the mystery of human life with beautiful

and imperishable symbols; it became a comforting fulfilment of all the
yearning for immortality, of all desire of mortals for eternal life.

Man leaves the mother, the source of libido, and is driven by the
eternal thirst to find her again, and to drink renewal from her; thus he
completes his cycle, and returns again into the mother’s womb. Every
obstacle which obstructs his life’s path, and threatens his ascent,
wears the shadowy features of the “terrible mother,” who paralyzes his
energy with the consuming poison of the stealthy, retrospective longing.
In each conquest he wins again the smiling love and life-giving
mother—images which belong to the intuitive depths of human feeling, the


features of which have become mutilated and irrecognizable through the

progressive development of the surface of the human mind. The stern


necessity of adaptation works ceaselessly to obliterate the last traces


of these primitive landmarks of the period of the origin of the human

mind, and to replace them along lines which are to denote more and more
clearly the nature of real objects.


                              CHAPTER VIII


                             THE SACRIFICE

After this long digression, let us return to Miss Miller’s vision. We
can now answer the question as to the significance of Siegfried’s
longing for Brunhilde. It is the striving of the libido away _from the
mother towards the mother_. This paradoxical sentence may be translated
as follows: as long as the libido is satisfied merely with phantasies,
it moves in itself, in its own depths, in the mother.[789] When the


longing of our author rises in order to escape the magic circle of the

incestuous and, therefore, pernicious, object, and it does not succeed
in finding reality, then the object is and remains irrevocably the
mother. Only the overcoming of the obstacles of reality brings the
deliverance from the mother, who is the continuous and inexhaustible
source of life for the creator, but death for the cowardly, timid and
sluggish.


Whoever is acquainted with psychoanalysis knows how often neurotics cry

out against their parents. To be sure, such complaints and reproaches
are often justified on account of the common human imperfections, but


still more often they are reproaches which should really be directed

towards themselves. Reproach and hatred are always futile attempts to
free one’s self apparently from the parents, but in reality from one’s
own hindering longing for the parents. Our author proclaims through the


mouth of her infantile hero Chiwantopel a series of insults against her

own family. We can assume that she must renounce all these tendencies,
because they contain an unrecognized wish. This hero, of many words, who
performs few deeds and indulges in futile yearnings, is the libido which
has not fulfilled its destiny, but which turns round and round in the
kingdom of the mother, and, in spite of all its longing, accomplishes
nothing. Only he can break this magic circle who possesses the courage
of the will to live and the heroism to carry it through. Could this
yearning hero-youth, Chiwantopel, but put an end to his existence, he
would probably rise again in the form of a brave man seeking real life.


This necessity imposes itself upon the dreamer as a wise counsel and