purpose of making this genetic conception familiar to the reader. The
explanation of this harmless deceit I have saved until the second part.

For the first time, through this genetic idea of libido, which in every
way surpasses the descriptive sexual, the transference was made possible
of the Freudian libido theory into the psychology of mental disease. The


passage quoted above shows how the present Freudian conception of libido

collides with the problem of the psychoses.[267] Therefore, when I speak
of libido, I associate with it the genetic conception which contains not


only the immediate sexual but also an amount of desexualized primal

libido. When I say a sick person takes his libido away from the outer
world, in order to take possession of the inner world with it, I do not


mean that he takes away merely the affluxes from the function of

reality, but he takes energy away, according to my view, from those


desexualized instincts which regularly and properly support the function

of reality.

With this alteration in the libido conception, certain parts of our
terminology need revision as well. As we know, Abraham has undertaken


the experiment of transferring the Freudian libido theory to dementia

præcox and has conceived the characteristic lack of rapport and the
cessation of the function of reality as autoerotism. This conception
needs revision. Hysterical introversion of the libido leads to
autoerotism, since the patient’s erotic afflux of libido designed for
the function of adaptation is introverted, whereby his ego is occupied
by the corresponding amount of erotic libido. The schizophrenic,
however, shuns reality far more than merely the erotic afflux would
account for; therefore, his inner condition is very different from that
of the hysteric. He is more than autoerotic, he builds up an
intra-psychic equivalent for reality, for which purpose he has


necessarily to employ other dynamics than that afforded by the erotic

afflux. Therefore, I must grant to Bleuler the right to reject the
conception of autoerotism, taken from the study of hysterical neuroses,
and there legitimate, and to replace it by the conception of
autismus.[268] I am forced to say that this term is better fitted to
facts than autoerotism. With this I acknowledge my earlier idea of the
identity of autismus (Bleuler) and autoerotism (Freud) as unjustified,
and, therefore, retract it.[269] This thorough revision of the
conception of libido has compelled me to this.


From these considerations it follows necessarily that the descriptive


psychologic conception of libido must be given up in order for the

libido theory to be applied to dementia præcox. That it is there
applicable is best shown in Freud’s brilliant investigation of
Schreber’s phantasies. The question now is whether this genetic
conception of libido proposed by me is suitable for the neuroses. I
believe that this question may be answered affirmatively. “Natura non
fecit saltum”—it is not merely to be expected but it is also probable


that at least temporary functional disturbances of various degrees

appear in the neuroses, which transcend the boundaries of the immediate
sexual; in any case, this occurs in psychotic episodes. I consider the


broadening of the conception of libido which has developed through the


most recent analytic work as a real advance which will prove of especial

advantage in the important field of the introversion psychoses. Proofs
of the correctness of my assumption are already at hand. It has become
apparent through a series of researches of the Zurich School, which are
now published in part,[270] that the phantastic substitution products


which take the place of the disturbed function of reality bear

unmistakable traces of archaic thought. This confirmation is parallel to
the postulate asserted above, according to which reality is deprived,
not merely of an immediate (individual) amount of libido, but also of an
already differentiated or desexualized quantity of libido, which, among
normal people, has belonged to the function of reality ever since
prehistoric times. _A dropping away of the last acquisition of the
function of reality (or adaptation) must of necessity be replaced by an
earlier mode of adaptation._ We find this principle already in the
doctrines of the neuroses, that is, that a repression resulting from the


failure of the recent transference is replaced by an old way of

transference, namely, through a regressive revival of the parent imago.
In the transference neurosis (hysterical), where merely a part of the
_immediate sexual_ libido is taken away from reality by the specific
sexual repression, the substituted product is a phantasy of individual
origin and significance, with only a trace of those archaic traits found


in the phantasies of those mental disorders in which a portion of the


general human function of reality organized since antiquity has broken

off. This portion can be replaced only by a generally valid archaic
surrogate. We owe a simple and clear example of this proposition to the
investigation of Honegger.[271] A paranoic of good intelligence who has


a clear idea of the spherical form of the earth and its rotation around


the sun replaces the modern astronomical views by a system worked out in

great detail, which one must call archaic, in which the earth is a flat
disc over which the sun travels.[272] (I am reminded of the sun-phallus
mentioned in the first part of this book, for which we are also indebted
to Honegger.) Spielrein has likewise furnished some very interesting


examples of archaic definitions which begin in certain illnesses to

overlay the real meanings of the modern word. For example, Spielrein’s


patient had correctly discovered the mythological significance of

alcohol, the intoxicating drink, to be “an effusion of seed.”[273] She


also had a symbolism of boiling which I must place parallel to the

especially important alchemistic vision of Zosimos,[274] who found
people in boiling water within the cavity of the altar.[275] This
patient used earth in place of mother, and also water to express
mother.[276] I refrain from further examples because future work of the
Zurich School will furnish abundant evidence of this sort.


My foregoing proposition of the replacement of the disturbed function of


reality by an archaic surrogate is supported by an excellent paradox of

Spielrein’s. She says: “I often had the illusion that these patients
might be simply victims of a folk superstition.” As a matter of fact,
patients substitute phantasies for reality, phantasies similar to the
actually incorrect mental products of the past, which, however, were
once the view of reality. As the Zosimos vision shows, the old
superstitions were symbols[277] which permitted transitions to the most
remote territory. This must have been very expedient for certain archaic
periods, for by this means convenient bridges were offered to lead a
partial amount of libido over into the mental realm. Evidently Spielrein


thinks of a similar biological meaning of the symbols when she

says:[278]

  “Thus a symbol seems to me to owe its origin in general to the


  tendency of a complex for dissolution in the common totality of

  thought.... The complex is robbed by that of the personal element....
  This tendency towards dissolution (transformation) of every individual
  complex is the motive for poetry, painting, for every sort of art.”

When here we replace the formal conception “complex” by the conception
of the quantity of libido (the total effect of the complex), which, from
the standpoint of the libido theory, is a justified measure, then does
Spielrein’s view easily agree with mine. When primitive man understands
in general what an act of generation is, then, according to the
principle of the path of least resistance, he never can arrive at the
idea of replacing the generative organs by a sword-blade or a shuttle;
but this is the case with certain Indians, who explain the origin of
mankind by the union of the two transference symbols. He then must be


compelled to devise an analogous thing in order to bring a manifest

sexual interest upon an asexual expression. The propelling motive of
this transition of the _immediate sexual_ libido to the non-sexual
representation can, in my opinion, be found only in a _resistance which
opposes primitive sexuality_.

It appears as if, by this means of phantastic analogy formation, more
libido would gradually become desexualized, because increasingly more


phantasy correlates were put in the place of the primitive achievement

of the sexual libido. With this an enormous broadening of the world idea


was gradually developed because new objects were always assimilated as

sexual symbols. It is a question whether the human consciousness has not


been brought to its present state entirely or in great part in this

manner. It is evident, in any case, that an important significance in


the development of the human mind is due to the impulse towards the

discovery of analogy. We must agree thoroughly with Steinthal when he


says that an absolutely overweening importance must be granted to the

little phrase “Gleich wie” (even as) in the history of the development
of thought. It is easy to believe that the carryover of the libido to a


phantastic correlate has led primitive man to a number of the most

important discoveries.


                              CHAPTER III

 THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE LIBIDO. A POSSIBLE SOURCE OF PRIMITIVE HUMAN


                              DISCOVERIES


In the following pages I will endeavor to picture a concrete example of

the transition of the libido. I once treated a patient who suffered from
a depressive catatonic condition. The case was one of only a slight
introversion psychosis; therefore, the existence of many hysterical
features was not surprising. In the beginning of the analytic treatment,


while telling of a very painful occurrence she fell into a

hysterical-dreamy state, in which she showed all signs of sexual
excitement. For obvious reasons she lost the knowledge of my presence
during this condition. The excitement led to a masturbative act (frictio
femorum). This act was accompanied by a peculiar gesture. She made a
very _violent rotary motion_ with the forefinger of the left hand on the
left temple, as if she were boring a hole there. Afterwards there was
complete amnesia for what had happened, and there was nothing to be
learned about the queer gesture with her hand. Although this act can
easily be likened to a boring into the mouth, nose or ear, now
transferred to the temple, it belongs in the territory of infantile
ludus sexualis[279]—to the preliminary exercise preparatory to sexual
activity. Without really understanding it, this gesture, nevertheless,
seemed very important to me. Many weeks later I had an opportunity to
speak to the patient’s mother, and from her I learned that her daughter
had been a very exceptional child. When only two years old she would sit


with her back to an open cupboard door for hours and rhythmically beat

her head against the door[280]—to the distraction of the household. A
little later, instead of playing as other children, she began to bore a
hole with her finger in the plaster of the wall of the house. She did
this with little turning and scraping movements, and kept herself busy
at this occupation for hours. She was a complete puzzle to her parents.
From her fourth year she practised onanism. It is evident that in this


early infantile activity the preliminary stage of the later trouble may

be found. The especially remarkable features in this case are, first,
that the child did not carry out the action on its own body, and,
secondly, the assiduity with which it carried on the action.[281] One is
tempted to bring these two facts into a causal relationship and to say,
because the child does not accomplish this action on her own body,
perhaps that is the reason of the assiduity, for by boring into the wall


she never arrives at the same satisfaction as if she executed the

activity onanistically on her own body.


The very evident onanistic boring of the patient can be traced back to a

very early stage of childhood, which is prior to the period of local
onanism. That time is still psychologically very obscure, because
individual reproductions and memories are lacking to a great extent, the
same as among animals. The race characteristics (manner of life)
predominate during the entire life of the animal, whereas among men the
individual character asserts itself over the race type. Granting the
correctness of this remark, we are struck with the apparently wholly
incomprehensible individual activity of this child at this early age. We
learn from her later life history that her development, which is, as is
always the case, intimately interwoven with parallel external events,


has led to that mental disturbance which is especially well known on

account of its individuality and the originality of its productions, i.
e. dementia præcox. The peculiarity of this disturbance, as we have
pointed out above, depends upon the predominance of the phantastic form
of thought—of the infantile in general. From this type of thinking
proceed all those numerous contacts with mythological products, and that


which we consider as original and wholly individual creations are very


often creations which are comparable with nothing but those of

antiquity. I believe that this comparison can be applied to all
formations of this remarkable illness, and perhaps also to this special
symptom of boring. We have already seen that the onanistic boring of the
patient dated from a very early stage of childhood, that is to say, it
was reproduced from that period of the past. The sick woman fell back


for the first time into the early onanism only after she had been