and to pray him to give them a speedy delivery. It was originally the
custom for the horse to rub against the woman’s genitals. The horse
(like the ass) had in general the significance of a priapic animal.[586]
Horse’s tracks are idols dispensing blessing and fertility. Horse’s
tracks established a claim, and were of significance in determining
boundaries, like the priaps of Latin antiquity. Like the phallic
Dactyli, a horse opened the mineral riches of the Harz Mountains with
his hoof. The horseshoe, an equivalent for horse’s foot,[587] brings
luck and has apotropaic meaning. In the Netherlands an entire horse’s
foot is hung up in the stable to ward against sorcery. The analogous
effect of the phallus is well known; hence the phalli at the gates. In
particular the horse’s leg turned lightning aside, according to the
principle “similia similibus.”

Horses also symbolize the wind, that is to say, the tertium
comparationis is again the libido symbol. The German legend recognizes
the wind as the wild huntsman in pursuit of the maiden. Stormy regions
frequently derive their names from horses, as the White Horse Mountain
of the Lüneburger heath. The centaurs are typical wind gods, and have
been represented as such by Böcklin’s artistic intuition.[588]

Horses also signify fire and light. The fiery horses of Helios are an
example. The horses of Hector are called Xanthos (yellow, bright),
Podargos (swift-footed), Lampos (shining) and Aithon (burning). A very
pronounced fire symbolism was represented by the mystic Quadriga,
mentioned by Dio Chrysostomus. The supreme God always drives his chariot
in a circle. Four horses are harnessed to the chariot. The horse driven
on the periphery moves very quickly. He has a shining coat, and bears
upon it the signs of the planets and the Zodiac.[589] This is a
representation of the rotary fire of heaven. The second horse moves more
slowly, and is illuminated only on one side. The third moves still more
slowly, and the fourth rotates around himself. But once the outer horse
set the second horse on fire with his fiery breath, and the third
flooded the fourth with his streaming sweat. Then the horses dissolve
and pass over into the substance of the strongest and most fiery, which
now becomes the charioteer. The horses also represent the four elements.
The catastrophe signifies the conflagration of the world and the deluge,
whereupon the division of the God into many parts ceases, and the divine
unity is restored.[590] Doubtless the Quadriga may be understood
astronomically as a _symbol of time_. We already saw in the first part
that the stoic representation of Fate is a fire symbol. It is,
therefore, a logical continuation of the thought, when time, closely
related to the conception of destiny, exhibits this same libido
symbolism. Brihadâranyaka-Upanishad, i: 1, says:

  “The morning glow verily is the head of the sacrificial horse, the sun
  his eye, the wind his breath, the all-spreading fire his mouth, the
  year is the belly of the sacrificial horse. The sky is his back, the
  atmosphere the cavern of his body, the earth the vault of his belly.
  The poles are his sides, in between the poles his ribs, the seasons
  his limbs, the months and fortnights his joints. Days and nights are
  his feet, stars his bones, clouds his flesh. The food he digests is
  the deserts, the rivers are his veins, the mountains his liver and
  lungs, the herbs and trees his hair; the rising sun is his fore part,
  the setting sun his after part. The ocean is his kinsman, the sea his
  cradle.”

The horse undoubtedly here stands for a time symbol, and also for the
entire world. We come across in the Mithraic religion, a strange God of
Time, Aion, called Kronos or Deus Leontocephalus, because his
stereotyped representation is a lion-headed man, who, standing in a
rigid attitude, is encoiled by a snake, whose head projects forward from
behind over the lion’s head. The figure holds in each hand a key, on the
chest rests a thunderbolt, upon his back are the four wings of the wind;
in addition to that, the figure sometimes bears the Zodiac on his body.
Additional attributes are a cock and implements. In the Carolingian
psalter of Utrecht, which is based upon ancient models, the Sæculum-Aion
is represented as a naked man with a snake in his hand. As is suggested
by the name of the divinity, he is a symbol of time, most interestingly
composed from libido symbols. The lion, the zodiac sign of the greatest
summer heat,[591] is the symbol of the most mighty desire. (“My soul
roars with the voice of a hungry lion,” says Mechthild of Magdeburg.) In
the Mithra mystery the serpent is often antagonistic to the lion,


corresponding to that very universal myth of the battle of the sun with

the dragon.

In the Egyptian Book of the Dead, Tum is even designated as a he-cat,
because as such he fought the snake, Apophis. The encoiling also means
the engulfing, the entering into the mother’s womb. Thus time is defined
by the rising and setting of the sun, that is to say, through the death
and renewal of the libido. The addition of the cock again suggests time,
and the addition of implements suggests the creation through time.
(“Durée créatrice,” Bergson.) Oromazdes and Ahriman were produced
through Zrwanakarana, the “infinitely long duration.” Time, this empty
and purely formal concept, is expressed in the mysteries by
transformations of the creative power, the libido. Macrobius says:

  “Leonis capite monstratur praesens tempus—quia conditio ejus valida
  fervensque est.”[592]

Philo of Alexandria has a better understanding:

  “Tempus ab hominibus pessimis putatur deus volentibus Ens essentiale
  abscondere—pravis hominibus tempus putatur causa rerum mundi,
  sapientibus vero et optimis non tempus sed Deus.”[593][594]

In Firdusi[595] time is often the symbol of fate, the libido nature of
which we have already learned to recognize. The Hindoo text mentioned
above includes still more—its symbol of the horse contains the whole
world; his kinsman and his cradle is the sea, the mother, similar to the
world soul, the maternal significance of which we have seen above. Just
as Aion represents the libido in an embrace, that is to say, in the
state of death and of rebirth, so here the cradle of the horse is the
sea, i. e. the libido is in the mother, dying and rising again, like the
symbol of the dying and resurrected Christ, who hangs like ripe fruit
upon the tree of life.


We have already seen that the horse is connected through Ygdrasil with

the symbolism of the tree. The horse is also a “tree of death”; thus in
the Middle Ages the funeral pyre was called St. Michael’s horse, and the
neo-Persian word for coffin means “wooden horse.”[596] The horse has
also the rôle of psycho-pompos; he is the steed to conduct the souls to
the other world—horsewomen fetch the souls (Valkyries). Neo-Greek songs
represent Charon on a horse. These definitions obviously lead to the
mother symbolism. The Trojan horse was the only means by which the city
could be conquered; because only he who has entered the mother and been
reborn is an invincible hero. The Trojan horse is a magic charm, like
the “Nodfyr,” which also serves to overcome necessity. The formula
evidently reads, “In order to overcome the difficulty, thou must commit
incest, and once more be born from thy mother.” It appears that striking
a nail into the sacred tree signifies something very similar. The “Stock
im Eisen” in Vienna seems to have been such a palladium.

Still another symbolic form is to be considered. Occasionally the devil
rides upon a three-legged horse. The Goddess of Death, Hel, in time of
pestilence, also rides upon a three-legged horse.[597] The gigantic ass,
which is three-legged, stands in the heavenly rain lake Vourukasha; his
urine purifies the water of the lake, and from his roar all useful
animals become pregnant and all harmful animals miscarry. The Triad
further points to the phallic significance. The contrasting symbolism of
Hel is blended into one conception in the ass of Vourukasha. The libido
is fructifying as well as destroying.

These definitions, as a whole, plainly reveal the fundamental features.
The horse is a libido symbol, partly of phallic, partly of maternal
significance, like the tree. It represents the libido in this
application, that is, the libido repressed through the incest
prohibition.

In the Miller drama an Indian approaches the hero, ready to shoot an
arrow at him. Chiwantopel, however, with a proud gesture, exposes his
breast to the enemy. This idea reminds the author of the scene between
Cassius and Brutus in Shakespeare’s “Julius Cæsar.” A misunderstanding
has arisen between the two friends, when Brutus reproaches Cassius for
withholding from him the money for the legions. Cassius, irritable and
angry, breaks out into the complaint:

        “Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come,
        Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius,
        For Cassius is a-weary of the world:
        Hated by one he loves: braved by his brother:
        Check’d like a bondman; _all his faults observed_:
        Set in a note-book, learn’d and conn’d by rote,
        To cast into my teeth. O I could weep
        My spirit from mine eyes!—There is my dagger,
        And here my naked breast; within, a heart
        Dearer than Plutus’ mine, richer than gold:
        If that thou beest a Roman, take it forth:
        I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart.
        Strike, as thou didst at Cæsar; for I know
        When thou didst hate him worst, thou lov’dst him better
        Than ever thou lov’dst Cassius.”


The material here would be incomplete without mentioning the fact that


this speech of Cassius shows many analogies to the agonized delirium of

Cyrano (compare Part I), only Cassius is far more theatrical and
overdrawn. Something childish and hysterical is in his manner. Brutus
does not think of killing him, but administers a very chilling rebuke in
the following dialogue:

     BRUTUS: Sheathe your dagger:
             Be angry when you will, it shall have scope:
             Do what you will, dishonor shall be humor.
             _O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb_
             That carries anger as the flint bears fire:
             Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark,
             And straight is cold again.

     CASSIUS:                            Hath Cassius liv’d


             To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus

             When grief and blood ill-tempered vexeth him?

     BRUTUS: When I spoke that, I was ill-tempered too.

     CASSIUS: Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.

     BRUTUS: And my heart too.

     CASSIUS:                  O Brutus!

     BRUTUS:                             What’s the matter?

     CASSIUS: Have not you love enough to bear with me
              When that rash humor _which my mother gave me_
              Makes me forgetful?

     BRUTUS:                      Yes, Cassius, and from henceforth
              When you are over earnest with your Brutus,
              He’ll think your mother chides and leave you so.

The analytic interpretation of Cassius’s irritability plainly reveals
that at these moments he identifies himself with the mother, and his
conduct, therefore, is truly feminine, as his speech demonstrates most
excellently. For his womanish love-seeking and desperate subjection


under the proud masculine will of Brutus calls forth the friendly remark