caused by the onslaught of the unconscious desires. The libido festers
in his flesh, a cruel god has taken possession of him and pierced him
with his painful libidian projectiles, with thoughts, which
overwhelmingly pass through him. (As a dementia præcox patient once said
to me during his recovery: “To-day a thought suddenly thrust itself
through me.”) This same idea is found again in Nietzsche in Zarathustra:

                           _The Magician_

           Stretched out, shivering
           Like one half dead whose feet are warmed,
           Shaken alas! by unknown fevers,
           Trembling from the icy pointed arrows of frost,
           Hunted by Thee, O Thought!
           Unutterable! Veiled! Horrible One!
           Thou huntsman behind the clouds!
           Struck to the ground by thee,
           Thou mocking eye that gazeth at me from the dark!
           —————— Thus do I lie
           Bending, writhing, tortured
           With all eternal tortures,


           Smitten

           By thee, crudest huntsman,
           Thou unfamiliar God.

           Smite deeper!
           Smite once more:
           Pierce through and rend my heart!


           What meaneth this torturing

           With blunt-toothed arrows?
           Why gazeth thou again,
           Never weary of human pain,
           With malicious, God-lightning eyes,
           Thou wilt not kill,
           But torture, torture?

No long-drawn-out explanation is necessary to enable us to recognize in
this comparison the old, universal idea of the martyred sacrifice of
God, which we have met previously in the Mexican sacrifice of the cross
and in the sacrifice of Odin.[609] This same conception faces us in the
oft-repeated martyrdom of St. Sebastian, where, in the delicate-glowing
flesh of the young god, all the pain of renunciation which has been felt
by the artist has been portrayed. An artist always embodies in his
artistic work a portion of the mysteries of his time. In a heightened
degree the same is true of the principal Christian symbol, the crucified
one pierced by the lance, the conception of the man of the Christian era
tormented by his wishes, crucified and dying in Christ.

This is not torment which comes from without, which befalls mankind; but
that he himself is the hunter, murderer, sacrificer and sacrificial
knife is shown us in another of Nietzsche’s poems, wherein the apparent


dualism is transformed into the soul conflict through the use of the

same symbolism:

                 “Oh, Zarathustra,
                 Most cruel Nimrod!


                 Whilom hunter of God

                 The snare of all virtue,
                 An arrow of evil!


                 Now


                 Hunted by thyself


                 Thine own prey

                 Pierced through thyself,


                 Now


                 Alone with thee


                 Twofold in thine own knowledge


                 Mid a hundred mirrors

                 False to thyself,


                 Mid a hundred memories


                 Uncertain


                 Ailing with each wound


                 Shivering with each frost

                 Caught in thine own snares,
                 Self knower!
                 Self hangman!

                 “Why didst thou strangle thyself
                 With the noose of thy wisdom?


                 Why hast thou enticed thyself

                 Into the Paradise of the old serpent?


                 Why hast thou crept

                 Into thyself, thyself?...”

The deadly arrows do not strike the hero from without, but it is he
himself who, in disharmony with himself, hunts, fights and tortures
himself. Within himself will has turned against will, libido against
libido—therefore, the poet says, “Pierced through thyself,” that is to
say, wounded by his own arrow. Because we have discerned that the arrow
is a libido symbol, the idea of “penetrating or piercing through”
consequently becomes clear to us. It is a phallic act of union with
one’s self, a sort of self-fertilization (introversion); also a
self-violation, a self-murder; therefore, Zarathustra may call himself
his own hangman, like Odin, who sacrifices himself to Odin.

The wounding by one’s own arrow means, first of all, _the state of
introversion_. What this signifies we already know—the libido sinks into
its “own depths” (a well-known comparison of Nietzsche’s) and finds
there below, in the shadows of the unconscious, the substitute for the
upper world, which it has abandoned: _the world of memories_ (“’mid a
hundred memories”), the strongest and most influential of which are the
early infantile memory pictures. It is the world of the child, this
paradise-like state of earliest childhood, from which we are separated
by a hard law. In this subterranean kingdom slumber sweet feelings of
home and the endless hopes of all that is to be. As Heinrich in the
“Sunken Bell,” by Gerhart Hauptmann, says, in speaking of his miraculous
work:

             “There is a song lost and forgotten,
             A song of home, a love song of childhood,
             Brought up from the depths of the fairy well,
             Known to all, but yet unheard.”

However, as Mephistopheles says, “The danger is great.” These depths are
enticing; they are the mother and—death. When the libido leaves the
bright upper world, whether from the decision of the individual or from
decreasing life force, then it sinks back into its own depths, into the
source from which it has gushed forth, and turns back to that point of
cleavage, the umbilicus, through which it once entered into this body.
This point of cleavage is called the mother, because from her comes the
source of the libido. Therefore, when some great work is to be
accomplished, before which weak man recoils, doubtful of his strength,
his libido returns to that source—and this is the dangerous moment, in
which the decision takes place between annihilation and new life. If the
libido remains arrested in the wonder kingdom of the inner world,[610]
then the man has become for the world above a phantom, then he is
practically dead or desperately ill.[611] But if the libido succeeds in
tearing itself loose and pushing up into the world above, then a miracle
appears. This journey to the underworld has been a fountain of youth,
and new fertility springs from his apparent death. This train of thought
is very beautifully gathered into a Hindoo myth: Once upon a time,
Vishnu sank into an ecstasy (introversion) and during this state of
sleep bore Brahma, who, enthroned upon the lotus flower, arose from the
navel of Vishnu, bringing with him the Vedas, which he diligently read.
(Birth of creative thought from introversion.) But through Vishnu’s
ecstasy a devouring flood came upon the world. (Devouring through
introversion, symbolizing the danger of entering into the mother of
death.) A demon taking advantage of the danger, stole the Vedas from
Brahma and hid them in the depths. (Devouring of the libido.) Brahma
roused Vishnu, and the latter, transforming himself into a fish, plunged
into the flood, fought with the demon (battle with the dragon),
conquered him and recaptured the Vedas. (Treasure obtained with
difficulty.)

Self-concentration and the strength derived therefrom correspond to this
primitive train of thought. It also explains numerous sacrificial and
magic rites which we have already fully discussed. Thus the impregnable
Troy falls because the besiegers creep into the belly of a wooden horse;
for he alone is a hero who is reborn from the mother, like the sun. But
the danger of this venture is shown by the history of Philoctetes, who


was the only one in the Trojan expedition who knew the hidden sanctuary

of Chryse, where the Argonauts had sacrificed already, and where the


Greeks planned to sacrifice in order to assure a safe ending to their

undertaking. Chryse was a nymph upon the island of Chryse; according to
the account of the scholiasts in Sophocles’s “Philoctetes,” this nymph
loved Philoctetes, and cursed him because he spurned her love. This
characteristic projection, which is also met with in the Gilgamesh epic,
should be referred back, as suggested, to the repressed incest wish of
the son, who is represented through the projection as if the mother had
the evil wish, for the refusal of which the son was given over to death.
In reality, however, the son becomes mortal by separating himself from
the mother. His fear of death, therefore, corresponds to the repressed
wish to turn back to the mother, and causes him to believe that the
mother threatens or pursues him. The teleological significance of this
_fear of persecution_ is evident; _it is to keep son and mother apart_.

The curse of Chryse is realized in so far that Philoctetes, according to
one version, when approaching his altar, injured himself in his foot
with one of his own deadly poisonous arrows, or, according to another
version[612] (this is better and far more abundantly proven), _was
bitten in his foot by a poisonous serpent_.[613] From then on he is
ailing.[614]

This very typical wound, which also destroyed Rê, is described in the
following manner in an Egyptian hymn:

          “The ancient of the Gods moved his mouth,
          He cast his saliva upon the earth,
          And what he spat, fell upon the ground.


          With her hands Isis kneaded that and the soil

          Which was about it, together:
          From that she created a venerable worm,
          And made him like a spear.
          She did not twist him living around her face,
          But threw him coiled upon the path,


          Upon which the great God wandered at ease

          Through all his lands.

          “The venerable God stepped forth radiantly,
          The gods who served Pharaoh accompanied him,
          And he proceeded as every day.
          Then the venerable worm stung him....


          The divine God opened his mouth

          And the voice of his majesty echoed even to the sky.
          And the gods exclaimed: Behold!
          Thereupon he could not answer,
          His jaws chattered,


          All his limbs trembled

          And the poison gripped his flesh,
          As the Nile seizes upon the land.”


In this hymn Egypt has again preserved for us a primitive conception of

the serpent’s sting. The aging of the autumn sun as an image of human


senility is symbolically traced back to the mother through the poisoning

by the serpent. The mother is reproached, because her malice causes the
death of the sun-god. The serpent, the primitive symbol of fear,[615]
illustrates the repressed tendency to turn back to the mother, because
the only possibility of security from death is possessed by the mother,
as the source of life.

Accordingly, only the mother can cure him, sick unto death, and,
therefore, the hymn goes on to depict how the gods were assembled to
take counsel:

      “And Isis came with her wisdom:
      Her mouth is full of the breath of life,
      Her words banish sorrow,
      And her speech animates those who no longer breathe.
      She said: ‘What is that; what is that, divine father?
      Behold, a worm has brought you sorrow——’

      “‘Tell me thy name, divine father,
      Because the man remains alive, who is called by his name.’”

Whereupon Rê replied:

    “‘I am he, who created heaven and earth, and piled up the hills,
    And created all beings thereon.
    I am he, who made the water and caused the great flood,
    Who produced the bull of his mother,
    Who is the procreator,’ etc.

    “The poison did not depart, it went further,
    The great God was not cured.
    Then said Isis to Rê:
    ‘Thine is not the name thou hast told me.
    Tell me true that the poison may leave thee,
    For he whose name is spoken will live.’”

Finally Rê decides to speak his true name. He is approximately healed
(imperfect composition of Osiris); but he has lost his power, and
finally he retreats to the heavenly cow.

The poisonous worm is, if one may speak in this way, a “negative”
phallus, a deadly, not an animating, form of libido; therefore, a wish
for death, instead of a wish for life. The “true name” is soul and magic
power; hence a symbol of libido. What Isis demands is the retransference
of the libido to the mother goddess. This request is fulfilled
literally, for the aged god turns back to the divine cow, the symbol of
the mother.[616] This symbolism is clear from our previous explanations.
The onward urging, living libido which rules the consciousness of the
son, demands separation from the mother. The longing of the child for
the mother is a hindrance on the path to this, taking the form of a
psychologic resistance, which is expressed empirically in the neurosis
by all manners of fears, that is to say, the fear of life. The more a
person withdraws from adaptation to reality, and falls into slothful
inactivity, the greater becomes his anxiety (cum grano salis), which
everywhere besets him at each point as a hindrance upon his path. The
fear springs from the mother, that is to say, from the longing to go
back to the mother, which is opposed to the adaptation to reality. This


is the way in which the mother has become apparently the malicious