Revelation:

  “And being turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks. And in the midst
  of the candlesticks[162] one like unto the son of man, clothed with a
  garment down to the foot, and girt about at the breasts with a golden
  girdle. And his head and his hair were white as white wool, white as
  snow, and his eyes were as a flame of fire. And his feet like unto
  burnished brass, as if it had been refined in a furnace; and his voice
  as the sound of many waters. And he had in his right hand seven
  stars,[163] and out of his mouth proceeded a sharp two-edged
  sword,[164] and his countenance was as the sun shineth in his
  strength.”—_Rev._ i: 12 ff.

  “And I looked, and beheld a white cloud, and upon the cloud I saw one
  sitting like unto the son of man, having on his head a golden crown,
  and in his hand a sharp sickle.”[165]—_Rev._ xiv: 14.

  “And his eyes were as a flame of fire, and upon his head were many
  diadems. And he was arrayed in a garment[166] sprinkled with blood....
  And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses,
  clothed in fine linen,[167] white and pure. And out of his mouth
  proceeded a sharp sword.”—_Rev._ xix: 12–15.


One need not assume that there is a direct dependency between the

Apocalypse and the Mithraic liturgy. The visionary images of both texts
are developed from a source, not limited to one place, but found in the
soul of many divers people, because the symbols which arise from it are
too typical for it to belong to one individual only. I put these images
here to show how the primitive symbolism of light gradually developed,
with the increasing depth of the vision, into the idea of the sun-hero,
the “well-beloved.”[168] The development of the symbol of light is
thoroughly typical. In addition to this, perhaps I might call to mind


the fact that I have previously pointed out this course with numerous

examples,[169] and, therefore, I can spare myself the trouble of
returning to this subject.[170] These visionary occurrences are the
psychological roots of the sun-coronations in the mysteries. Its rite is
religious hallucination congealed into liturgical form, which, on
account of its great regularity, could become a generally accepted outer
form. After all this, it is easily understood how the ancient Christian
Church, on one side, stood in an especial bond to Christ as “sol novus,”
and, on the other side, had a certain difficulty in freeing itself from
the earthly symbols of Christ. Indeed Philo of Alexandria saw in the sun
the image of the divine logos or of the Deity especially (“De Somniis,”
1:85). In an Ambrosian hymn Christ is invoked by “O sol salutis,” and so
on. At the time of Marcus Aurelius, Meliton, in his work,[171] περὶ
λούτρου, called Christ the Ἥλιος ἀνατολης ... μόνος ἥλιος οὗτος
ἀνέτειλεν ἀπ’ οὐρανοῦ.[172]

Still more important is a passage from Pseudo-Cyprian:[173]

  “O quam præclara providentia ut illo die quo factus est sol, in ipso
  die nasceretur Christus, v. Kal. Apr. feria IV, et ideo de ipso ad
  plebem dicebat Malachias propheta: ‘Orietur vobis sol iustitiæ et
  curatio est in pennis ejus,’ hic est sol iustitiæ cuius in pennis
  curatio præostendebatur.”[174][175]

In a work nominally attributed to John Chrysostomus, “De Solstitiis et
Aequinoctiis,”[176] occurs this passage:

  “Sed et dominus nascitur mense Decembri hiemis tempore, VIII. Kal.
  Januarias, quando oleæ maturæ præmuntur ut unctio, id est Chrisma,
  nascatur—sed et Invicti natalem appellant. Quis utique tam invictus
  nisi dominus noster qui mortem subactam devicit? Vel quod dicant Solis
  esse natalem, ipse est sol iustitiæ, de quo Malachias propheta dixit:
  ‘Dominus lucis ac noctis conditor et discretor qui a propheta Sol
  iustitiæ cognominatus est.’”[177]

According to the testimony of Eusebius of Alexandria, the Christians
also shared in the worship of the rising sun, which lasted into the
fifth century:

  οὐαῖ τοῖς προσκυνοῦσι τὸν ἥλιον καὶ τὴν σελήνην καὶ τοὺς ἀστέρας.
  Πολλοὺς γὰρ οἶδα τοὺς προσκυνοῦντας καὶ εὐχομένους εἰς τὸν ἥλιον. Ἤδη
  γὰρ ἀνατείλαντος τοῦ ἡλίου, προσεύχονται καὶ λέγουσιν “Ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς”
  καὶ οὐ μόνον Ἡλιογνώσται καὶ αἱρετικοὶ τοῦτο ποιοῦσιν ἀλλὰ καὶ
  χριστιανοὶ καὶ ἀφέντες τὴν πίστιν τοῖς αἱρετικοῖς συναμίγνυνται.[178]

Augustine preached emphatically to the Christians:

  “Non est Dominus Sol factus sed per quem Sol factus est—ne quis
  carnaliter sapiens Solem istum (Christum) intelligendum putaret.”

Art has preserved much of the remnants of sun-worship,[179] thus the
nimbus around the head of Christ and the halo of the saints in general.


The Christian legends also attribute many fire and light symbols to the

saints.[180] The twelve apostles, for example, are likened to the twelve
signs of the zodiac, and are represented, therefore, with a star over
the head.[181]

It is not to be wondered at that the heathen, as Tertullian avows,
considered the sun as the Christian God. Among the Manichaeans God was
really the sun. One of the most remarkable works extant, where the
Pagan, Asiatic, Hellenic and Christian intermingle, is the Ἐξήγησις περὶ
των ἐν Περσίδι πραχθέντων, edited by Wirth.[182] This is a book of
fables, but, nevertheless, a mine for near-Christian phantasies, which
gives a profound insight into Christian symbolism. In this is found the
following magical dedication: Διὶ Ἡλίῳ θεῳ μεγάλῳ βασιλεῖ Ἰησοῦ—.[183]


In certain parts of Armenia the rising sun is still worshipped by

Christians, that “it may let its foot rest upon the faces of the
worshippers.”[184] The foot occurs as an anthropomorphic attribute, and


we have already met the theriomorphic attribute in the feathers and the

sun phallus. Other comparisons of the sun’s ray, as knife, sword, arrow,
and so on, have also, as we have learned from the psychology of the
dream, a phallic meaning at bottom. This meaning is attached to the foot
as I here point out,[185] and also to the feathers, or hair, of the sun,
which signify the power or strength of the sun. I refer to the story of
Samson, and to that of the Apocalypse of Baruch, concerning the phœnix
bird, which, flying before the sun, loses its feathers, and, exhausted,
is strengthened again in an ocean bath at evening.

Under the symbol of “moth and sun” we have dug down into the historic
depths of the soul, and in doing this we have uncovered an old buried
idol, the youthful, beautiful, fire-encircled and halo-crowned sun-hero,
who, forever unattainable to the mortal, wanders upon the earth, causing
night to follow day; winter, summer; death, life; and who returns again
in rejuvenated splendor and gives light to new generations. The longing
of the dreamer concealed behind the moth stands for him.

The ancient pre-Asiatic civilizations were acquainted with a sun-worship
having the idea of a God dying and rising again (Osiris, Tammuz,
Attis-Adonis),[186] Christ, Mithra and his bull,[187] Phœnix and so on.


The beneficent power as well as the destroying power was worshipped in

fire. The forces of nature always have two sides, as we have already
seen in the God of Job. This reciprocal bond brings us back once more to
Miss Miller’s poem. Her reminiscences support our previous supposition,
that the symbol of moth and sun is a condensation of two ideas, about
one of which we have just spoken; the other is the moth and the flame.
As the title of a play, about the contents of which the author tells us
absolutely nothing, “Moth and Flame” may easily have the well-known
erotic meaning of flying around the flame of passion until one’s wings
are burned. The passionate longing, that is to say, the libido, has its
two sides; it is power which beautifies everything, and which under
other circumstances destroys everything. It often appears as if one


could not accurately understand in what the destroying quality of the

creative power consists. A woman who gives herself up to passion,
particularly under the present-day condition of culture, experiences the
destructive side only too soon. One has only to imagine one’s self a
little away from the every-day moral conditions in order to understand


what feelings of extreme insecurity overwhelm the individual who gives

himself unconditionally over to Fate.

To be fruitful means, indeed, to destroy one’s self, because with the


rise of the succeeding generation the previous one has passed beyond its

highest point; thus our descendants are our most dangerous enemies, whom
we cannot overcome, for they will outlive us, and, therefore, without
fail, will take the power from our enfeebled hands. The anxiety in the
face of the erotic fate is wholly understandable, for there is something
immeasurable therein. Fate usually hides unknown dangers, and the


perpetual hesitation of the neurotic to venture upon life is easily

explained by his desire to be allowed to stand still, so as not to take
part in the dangerous battle of life.[188] _Whoever renounces the chance
to experience must stifle in himself the wish for it, and, therefore,
commits a sort of self-murder._ From this the death phantasies which
readily accompany the renunciation of the erotic wish are made clear. In
the poem _Miss Miller has voiced these phantasies_.

She adds further to the material with the following:

  “I had been reading a selection from one of Byron’s poems which
  pleased me very much and made a deep and lasting impression. Moreover,
  the rhythm of my last two verses, ‘For I the source, etc.,’ and the
  two lines of Byron’s are very similar.

             ‘Now let me die as I have lived in faith,
             Nor tremble though the universe should quake.’”


This reminiscence with which the series of ideas is closed confirms the

death phantasies which follow from renunciation of the erotic wish. The
quotation comes—which Miss Miller did not mention—from an uncompleted
poem of Byron’s called “Heaven and Earth.”[189] The whole verse follows:

               “Still blessed be the Lord,
               For what is passed,
               For that which is;
               For all are His,
               From first to last—
               Time—Space—Eternity—Life—Death—


               The vast known and immeasurable unknown

               He made and can unmake,