               And shall I for a little gasp of breath

               Blaspheme and groan?
               No, let me die as I have lived in faith,
               Nor quiver though the universe may quake!”

The words are included in a kind of praise or prayer, spoken by a
“mortal” who is in hopeless flight before the mounting deluge. Miss
Miller puts herself in the same situation in her quotation; that is to
say, she readily lets it be seen that her feeling is similar to the


despondency of the unhappy ones who find themselves hard pressed by the

threatening mounting waters of the deluge. With this the writer allows
us a deep look into the dark abyss of her longing for the sun-hero. We
see that her longing is in vain; she is a mortal, only for a short time
borne upwards into the light by means of the highest longing, and then
sinking to death, or, much more, urged upwards by the fear of death,
like the people before the deluge, and in spite of the desperate
conflict, irretrievably given over to destruction. This is a mood which
recalls vividly the closing scene in “Cyrano de Bergerac”:[190]

         _Cyrano_:

         Oh, mais ... puisqu’elle est en chemin,
         Je l’attendrai debout ... et l’épée à la main.

         Que dites-vous?... C’est inutile? Je le sais.
         Mais on ne se bat pas dans l’espoir du succès.
         Non, non. C’est bien plus beau lorsque c’est inutile.

         Je sais bien qu’à la fin vous me mettrez à bas....


We already know sufficiently well what longing and what impulse it is

that attempts to clear a way for itself to the light, but that it may be
realized quite clearly and irrevocably, it is shown plainly in the
quotation “No, let me die,” which confirms and completes all earlier
remarks. The divine, the “much-beloved,” who is honored in the image of
the sun, is also the goal of the longing of our poet.

Byron’s “Heaven and Earth” is a mystery founded on the following passage
from Genesis, chapter vi:2: “And it came to pass ... that the sons of
God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and they took them
wives of all that they chose.” Byron offers as a further motif for his
poem the following passage from Coleridge: “_And woman wailing for her
Demon lover_.” Byron’s poem is concerned with two great events, one
psychologic and one telluric; the passion which throws down all
barriers; and all the terrors of the unchained powers of nature: a
parallel which has already been introduced into our earlier discussion.


The angels Samiasa and Azaziel burn with sinful love for the beautiful

daughters of Cain, Anah and Aholibama, and force a way through the
barrier which is placed between mortal and immortal. They revolt as
Lucifer once did against God, and the archangel Raphael raises his voice
warningly:

           “But man hath listened to his voice
           And ye to woman’s—beautiful she is,
           The serpent’s voice less subtle than her kiss.
           The snake but vanquished dust; but she will draw
           A second host from heaven to break heaven’s law.”

The power of God is threatened by the seduction of passion; a second
fall of angels menaces heaven. Let us translate this mythologic
projection back into the psychologic, from whence it originated. Then it
would read: the power of the good and reasonable ruling the world wisely
is threatened by the chaotic primitive power of passion; therefore
passion must be exterminated; that is to say, projected into mythology.


The race of Cain and the whole sinful world must be destroyed from the

roots by the deluge. It is the inevitable result of that sinful passion
which has broken through all barriers. Its counterpart is the sea and
the waters of the deep and the floods of rain,[191] the generating,
fructifying and “maternal waters,” as the Indian mythology refers to
them. Now they leave their natural bounds and surge over the mountain
tops, engulfing all living things; for passion destroys itself. The
libido is God and Devil. With the destruction of the sinfulness of the
libido an essential portion of the libido would be destroyed. Through
the loss of the Devil, God himself suffered a considerable loss,
somewhat like an amputation upon the body of the Divinity. The
mysterious hint in Raphael’s lament concerning the two rebels, Samiasa
and Azaziel, suggests this.

                                          “... Why,
              Cannot this earth be made, or be destroyed,


              Without involving ever some vast void

              In the immortal ranks?...”

Love raises man, not only above himself, but also above the bounds of
his mortality and earthliness, up to divinity itself, and in the very
act of raising him it destroys him. Mythologically, this
self-presumption finds its striking expression in the building of the
heaven-high tower of Babel, which brings confusion to mankind.[192] In
Byron’s poem it is the sinful ambition of the race of Cain, for love of


which it makes even the stars subservient and leads away the sons of God

themselves. If, indeed, longing for the highest things—if I may speak
so—is legitimate, then it lies in the circumstances that it leaves its
human boundaries, that of sinfulness, and, therefore, destruction. The
longing of the moth for the star is not absolutely pure and transparent,
but glows in sultry mist, for man continues to be man. Through the


excess of his longing he draws down the divine into the corruption of

his passion;[193] therefore, he seems to raise himself to the Divine;
but with that his humanity is destroyed. Thus the love of Anah and
Aholibama for their angels becomes the ruin of gods and men. The
invocation with which Cain’s daughters implore their angels is
psychologically an exact parallel to Miss Miller’s poem.

     _Anah_:[194]

     Seraph!
     From thy sphere!
     Whatever star[195] contains thy glory.


     In the eternal depths of heaven

     Albeit thou watchest with the ‘seven,’


     Though through space infinite and hoary

     Before thy bright wings worlds will be driven,

               Yet hear!
     Oh! think of her who holds thee dear!

     And though she nothing is to thee,
     Yet think that thou art all to her.

            ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

     Eternity is in thy years,
     Unborn, undying beauty in thine eyes;
     With me thou canst not sympathize,
     Except in love, and there thou must


     Acknowledge that more loving dust

     Ne’er wept beneath the skies.
     Thou walkest thy many worlds,[196] thou seest
     The face of him who made thee great,


     As he hath made of me the least

     Of those cast out from Eden’s gate;

     Yet, Seraph, dear!
               Oh hear!
     For thou hast loved me, and I would not die
     Until I know what I must die in knowing,


     That thou forgettest in thine eternity

     Her whose heart death could not keep from o’erflowing
     For thee, immortal essence as thou art,[197]
     Great is their love who love in sin and fear;
     And such, I feel, are waging in my heart
     A war unworthy: to an Adamite
     Forgive, my Seraph! that such thoughts appear.
     For sorrow is our element....

            ·       ·       ·       ·       ·


         The hour is near

     Which tells me we are not abandoned quite.
         Appear! Appear!
         Seraph!
     My own Azaziel! be but here,
     And leave the stars to their own light.

     _Aholibama_:

     I call thee, I await thee and I love thee.

            ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

     Though I be formed of clay,
     And thou of beams[198]
     More bright than those of day on Eden’s streams,


     Thine immortality cannot repay


     With love more warm than mine

     My love. There is a ray[199]
     In me, which though forbidden yet to shine,
     I feel was lighted at thy God’s and mine.[200]
     It may be hidden long: death and decay
     Our mother Eve bequeathed us—but my heart
     Defies it: though this life must pass away,
     Is that a cause for thee and me to part?

            ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

     I can share all things, even immortal sorrow;
     For thou hast ventured to share life with me,
     And shall I shrink from thine eternity?
     No, though the serpent’s sting[201] should pierce me through,
     And thou thyself wert like the serpent, coil
     Around me still.[202] And I will smile
     And curse thee not, but hold


     Thee in as warm a fold

     As—but descend and prove
     A mortal’s love
     For an immortal....

The apparition of both angels which follows the invocation is, as
always, a shining vision of light.

               _Aholibama_:


               The clouds from off their pinions flinging

               As though they bore to-morrow’s light.

               _Anah_:

               But if our father see the sight!

               _Aholibama_:


               He would but deem it was the moon

               Rising unto some sorcerer’s tune
               An hour too soon.

                      ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

               _Anah_:

               Lo! They have kindled all the west,
               Like a returning sunset....
               On Ararat’s late secret crest
               A wild and many colored bow,
               The remnant of their flashing path,
               Now shines!...

At the sight of this many-colored vision of light, where both women are
entirely filled with desire and expectation, Anah makes use of a simile
full of presentiment, which suddenly allows us to look down once more
into the dismal dark depths, out of which for a moment the terrible
animal nature of the mild god of light emerges.

           “... and now, behold! it hath
           Returned to night, as rippling foam,


           Which the leviathan hath lashed

           From his unfathomable home,
           When sporting on the face of the calm deep,
           Subsides soon after he again hath dash’d
           Down, down to where the ocean’s fountains sleep.”

Thus like the leviathan! We recall this overpowering weight in the scale
of God’s justice in regard to the man Job. There, where the deep sources
of the ocean are, the leviathan lives; from there the all-destroying
flood ascends, the all-engulfing flood of animal passion. That stifling,
compressing feeling[203] of the onward-surging impulse is projected
mythologically as a flood which, rising up and over all, destroys all
that exists, in order to allow a new and better creation to come forth
from this destruction.

          _Japhet_:


          The eternal will


          Shall deign to expound this dream

          Of good and evil; and redeem
          Unto himself all times, all things;

          And, gather’d under his almighty wings,
          Abolish hell!


          And to the expiated Earth

          Restore the beauty of her birth.

          _Spirits_:

          And when shall take effect this wondrous spell?

          _Japhet_:

          When the Redeemer cometh; first in pain
          And then in glory.

          _Spirits_:

          New times, new climes, new arts, new men, but still
          The same old tears, old crimes, and oldest ill,
          Shall be amongst your race in different forms;


          But the same mortal storms

          Shall oversweep the future, as the waves
          In a few hours the glorious giants’ graves.


The prophetic visions of Japhet have almost prophetic meaning for our

poetess; with the death of the moth in the light, evil is once more laid
aside; the complex has once again, even if in a censored form, expressed
itself. With that, however, the problem is not solved; all sorrow and
every longing begins again from the beginning, but there is “Promise in
the Air”—the premonition of the Redeemer, of the “Well-beloved,” of the
Sun-hero, who again mounts to the height of the sun and again descends
to the coldness of the winter, who is the light of hope from race to
race, the image of the libido.


                                PART II


                               CHAPTER I


                         ASPECTS OF THE LIBIDO

Before I enter upon the contents of this second part, it seems necessary


to cast a backward glance over the singular train of thought which the

analysis of the poem “The Moth to the Sun” has produced. Although this
poem is very different from the foregoing Hymn of Creation, closer
investigation of the “longing for the sun” has carried us into the realm
of the fundamental ideas of religion and astral mythology, which ideas
are closely related to those considered in the first poem. The creative
God of the first poem, whose dual nature, moral and physical, was shown
especially clearly to us by Job, has in the second poem a new
qualification of astral-mythological, or, to express it better, of
astrological character. The God becomes the sun, and in this finds an