will soon drop out again.[691] The woodpecker owes its special
significance to the circumstance that he _hammers holes into trees_.
(“To drive nails in,” as above!) It is, therefore, understandable that
he was made much of in the Roman legend as an old king of the country, a
possessor or ruler of the holy tree, the primitive image of the
Paterfamilias. An old fable relates how Circe, the spouse of King Picus,
transformed him into the Picus Martius, the woodpecker. The sorceress is
the “new-creating mother,” who has “magic influence” upon the
sun-husband. She kills him, transforms him into the soul-bird, the
unfulfilled wish. Picus was also understood as the wood demon and
incubus, as well as the soothsayer, all of which fully indicate the
mother libido.[692] Picus was often placed on a par with Picumnus by the
ancients. Picumnus is the inseparable companion of Pilumnus, and both
are actually called _infantium dii_, “the gods of little children.”
Especially it was said of Pilumnus that he defended new-born children
against the destroying attacks of the wood demon, Silvanus. (Good and
bad mother, the motive of the two mothers.)

The benevolent bird, a wish thought of deliverance which arises from
introversion,[693] advises the hero to shoot the magician under the
hair, which is the only vulnerable spot. This spot is the “phallic”
point,[694] if one may venture to say so; it is at _the top of the
head_, at the _place where the mystic birth from the head takes place_,
which even to-day appears in children’s sexual theories. Into that
Hiawatha shoots (one may say, very naturally) three arrows[695] (the
well-known phallic symbol), and thus kills Megissogwon. Thereupon he
steals the magic wampum armor, which renders him invulnerable (means of
immortality). He significantly leaves the dead lying in the
water—because the magician is the fearful mother:

                   “On the shore he left the body,
                   Half on land and half in water,
                   In the sand his feet were buried,
                   And his face was in the water.”

Thus the situation is the same as with the fish king, because the
monster is the personification of the water of death, which in its turn
represents the devouring mother. This great deed of Hiawatha’s, where he
has vanquished the mother as the death-bringing demon,[696] is followed
by his marriage with Minnehaha.


A little fable which the poet has inserted in the later song is

noteworthy. An old man is transformed into a youth, by _crawling through
a hollow oak tree_.


In the fourteenth song is a description of how Hiawatha discovers

writing. I limit myself to the description of two hieroglyphic tokens:

                  “Gitche Manito the Mighty,
                  He, the Master of Life, was painted
                  As an egg, with points projecting
                  To the four winds of the heavens.
                  Everywhere is the Great Spirit,
                  Was the meaning of this symbol.”

The world lies in the egg, which encompasses it at every point; it is
the cosmic woman with child, the symbol of which Plato as well as the
Vedas has made use of. This mother is like the air, which is everywhere.
But air is spirit; the mother of the world is a spirit:

                    “Mitche Manito the Mighty,
                    He the dreadful Spirit of Evil,
                    As a serpent was depicted,
                    As Kenabeek, the great serpent.”

But the spirit of evil is fear, is the forbidden desire, the adversary
who opposes not only each individual heroic deed, but life in its
struggle for eternal duration as well, and who introduces into our body


the poison of weakness and age through the treacherous bite of the

serpent. It is all that is retrogressive, and as the model of our first
world is our mother, all retrogressive tendencies are towards the
mother, and, therefore, are disguised under the incest image.


In both these ideas the poet has represented in mythologic symbols the


libido arising from the mother and the libido striving backward towards

the mother.

There is a description in the fifteenth song how Chibiabos, Hiawatha’s
best friend, the amiable player and singer, the embodiment of the joy of
life, was enticed by the evil spirits into ambush, fell through the ice
and was drowned. Hiawatha mourns for him so long that he succeeds, with
the aid of the magician, in calling him back again. But the revivified
friend is only a spirit, and he becomes master of the land of spirits.
(Osiris, lord of the underworld; the two Dioscuri.) Battles again
follow, and then comes the loss of a second friend, Kwasind, the
embodiment of physical strength.

In the twentieth song occur famine and the death of Minnehaha, foretold
by two taciturn guests from the land of death; and in the twenty-second
song Hiawatha prepares for a final journey to the west land:

                 “I am going, O Nokomis,
                 On a long and distant journey,
                 To the portals of the Sunset,
                 To the regions of the home-wind,
                 Of the Northwest-Wind Keewaydin.

                 “One long track and trail of splendor,
                 Down whose stream, as down a river,
                 Westward, westward, Hiawatha
                 Sailed into the fiery sunset,
                 Sailed into the purple vapors,
                 Sailed into the dusk of evening.

                 “Thus departed Hiawatha,
                 Hiawatha the Beloved,
                 In the glory of the sunset,
                 In the purple mists of evening,
                 To the regions of the home-wind,
                 Of the Northwest-Wind, Keewaydin,
                 To the Islands of the Blessed,
                 To the kingdom of Ponemah,
                 To the land of the Hereafter!”

The sun, victoriously arising, tears itself away from the embrace and
clasp, from the enveloping womb of the sea, and sinks again into the
maternal sea, into night, the all-enveloping and the all-reproducing,
leaving behind it the heights of midday and all its glorious works. This
image was the first, and was profoundly entitled to become the symbolic
carrier of human destiny; in the morning of life man painfully tears
himself loose from the mother, from the domestic hearth, to rise through
battle to his heights. Not seeing his worst enemy in front of him, but
bearing him within himself as a deadly longing for the depths within,
for drowning in his own source, for becoming absorbed into the mother,
his life is a constant struggle with death, a violent and transitory
delivery from the always lurking night. This death is no external enemy,


but a deep personal longing for quiet and for the profound peace of

non-existence, for a dreamless sleep in the ebb and flow of the sea of
life. Even in his highest endeavor for harmony and equilibrium, for
philosophic depths and artistic enthusiasm, he seeks death, immobility,
satiety and rest. If, like Peirithoos, he tarries too long in this place
of rest and peace, he is overcome by torpidity, and the poison of the
serpent paralyzes him for all time. If he is to live he must fight and
sacrifice his longing for the past, in order to rise to his own heights.
And having reached the noonday heights, he must also _sacrifice the love
for his own achievement_, for he may not loiter. The sun also sacrifices


its greatest strength in order to hasten onwards to the fruits of

autumn, which are the seeds of immortality; fulfilled in children, in
works, in posthumous fame, in a new order of things, all of which in
their turn begin and complete the sun’s course over again.

The “Song of Hiawatha” contains, as these extracts show, a material


which is very well adapted to bring into play the abundance of ancient

symbolic possibilities, latent in the human mind, and to stimulate it to
the creation of mythologic figures. But the products always contain the
same old problems of humanity, which rise again and again in new
symbolic disguise from the shadowy world of the unconscious. Thus Miss
Miller is reminded through the longing of Chiwantopel, of another mythic
cycle which appeared in the form of Wagner’s “Siegfried.” Especially is
this shown in the passage in Chiwantopel’s monologue, where he exclaims,
“There is not one who understands me, not one who resembles me, not one
who has a soul sister to mine.” Miss Miller observes that the sentiment


of this passage has the greatest analogy with the feelings which

Siegfried experienced for Brunhilde.

This analogy causes us to cast a glance at the song of Siegfried,
especially at the relation of Siegfried and Brunhilde. It is a
well-recognized fact that Brunhilde, the Valkyr, gives protection to the
birth (incestuous) of Siegfried, but while Sieglinde is the human
mother, Brunhilde has the rôle of “spiritual mother” (mother-imago);
however, unlike Hera towards Hercules, she is not a pursuer, but
benevolent. This sin, in which she is an accomplice, by means of the
help she renders, is the reason for her banishment by Wotan. The strange
birth of Siegfried from the sister-wife distinguishes him as Horus, as
the _reborn son_, a reincarnation of the retreating Osiris—Wotan. The
birth of the young son, of the hero, results, indeed, from mankind, who,
however, are merely the human bearers of the cosmic symbolism. Thus the
birth is protected by the spirit mother (Hera, Lilith): she sends
Sieglinde with the child in her womb (Mary’s flight) on the “night
journey on the sea” to the east:

                    “Onward, hasten;
                    Turn to the East.

                           ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

                    O woman, thou cherishest


                    The sublimest hero of the world

                    In thy sheltering womb.”


The motive of dismemberment is found again in the broken sword of

Siegmund, which was kept for Siegfried. From the dismemberment life is
pieced together again. (The Medea wonder.) Just as a smith forges the
pieces together, so is the dismembered dead again put together. (This
comparison is also found in “Timaios” of Plato: the parts of the world
joined together with pegs.) In the Rigveda, 10, 72, the creator of the
world, Brahmanaspati, is a smith.

                    “Brahmanaspati, as a blacksmith,
                    Welded the world together.”

The sword has the significance of the phallic sun power; therefore, a
sword proceeds from the mouth of the apocalyptic Christ; that is to say,
the procreative fire, the word, or the procreative Logos. In Rigveda,
Brahmanaspati is also a prayer-word, which possessed an ancient creative
significance:[697]

        “And this prayer of the singers, expanding from itself,
        Became a cow, which was already there before the world,
        Dwelling together in the womb of this god,
        Foster-children of the same keeper are the gods.”

                           —_Rigveda_ x: 31.

The Logos became a cow; that is to say, the mother, who is pregnant with
the gods. (In Christian uncanonical phantasies, where the Holy Ghost has
feminine significance, we have the well-known motive of the two mothers,
the earthly mother, Mary, and the spiritual mother, the Holy Ghost.) The
transformation of the Logos into the mother is not remarkable in itself,
because the origin of the phenomenon fire-speech seems to be the
mother-libido, according to the discussion in the earlier chapter. The
_spiritual is the mother-libido_. The significance of the sword, in the
Sanskrit conception, têjas, is probably partly determined by its
sharpness, as is shown above, in its connection with the libido
conception. The motive of pursuit (the pursuing Sieglinde, analogous to
Leto) is not here bound up with the spiritual mother, but with Wotan,
therefore corresponding to the Linos legend, where the father of the
wife is also the pursuer. Wotan is also the father of Brunhilde.
Brunhilde stands in a peculiar relation to Wotan. Brunhilde says to
Wotan:

  “Thou speakest to the will of Wotan By telling me what thou wishest:
  Who ... am I Were I not thy will?”

  _Wotan_:

  I take counsel only with myself, When I speak with thee....

Brunhilde is also somewhat the “angel of the face,” that creative will
or word,[698] emanating from God, also the Logos, which became the
child-bearing woman. God created the world through his word; that is to
say, his mother, the woman who is to bring him forth again. (He lays his
own egg.) This peculiar conception, it seems to me, can be explained by
assuming that the libido overflowing into speech (thought) has preserved


its sexual character to an extraordinary degree as a result of the