custom. Kuhn mentions such a case even in the year 1828, which occurred
in Germany. The solemn, magic ceremony was called the “Nodfyr”—“The fire
of need”[299]—and the charm was chiefly used against cattle epidemics.
Kuhn cites from the chronicle of Lanercost of the year 1268 an
especially noteworthy case of the “Nodfyr,”[300] the ceremonies of which
plainly reveal the fundamental phallic meaning:

  “Pro fidei divinæ integritate servanda recolat lector, quod cum hoc
  anno in Laodonia pestis grassaretur in pecudes armenti, quam vocant
  usetati Lungessouht, quidam bestiales, habitu claustrales non animo,
  docebant idiotas patriæ ignem confrictione de lignis educere et
  simulacrum Priapi statuere, et per hæc bestiis succurrere. Quod cum
  unus laicus Cisterciensis apud Fentone fecisset ante atrium aulæ, ac


  intinctis testiculis canis in aquam benedictam super animalis

  sparsisset, etc.”[301]

These examples, which allow us to recognize a clear sexual symbolism in
the generation of fire, prove, therefore, since they originate from
different times and different peoples, the existence of a universal


tendency to credit to fire production not only a magical but also a

sexual significance. This ceremonial or magic repetition of this very
ancient, long-outlived observance shows how insistently the human mind
clings to the old forms, and how deeply rooted is this very ancient
reminiscence of fire boring. One might almost be inclined to see in the


sexual symbolism of fire production a relatively late addition to the

priestly lore. This may, indeed, be true for the ceremonial elaboration
of the fire mysteries, but whether originally the generation of fire was
in general a sexual action, that is to say, a “coitus-play,” is still a
question. That similar things occur among very primitive people we learn
from the Australian tribe of the Watschandies,[302] who in the spring
perform the following magic ceremonies of fertilization: They dig a hole
in the ground, so formed and surrounded with bushes as to counterfeit a
woman’s genitals. They dance the night long around this hole; in


connection with this they hold spears in front of themselves in a manner

to recall the penis in erection. They dance around the hole and thrust
their spears into the ditch, while they cry to it, “Pulli nira, pulli
nira, _wataka_!” (Non fossa, non fossa, sed cunnus!) Such obscene dances
appear among other primitive races as well.[303]


In this spring incantation are contained the elements of the coitus

play.[304] This play is nothing but a coitus game, that is to say,


originally this play was simply a coitus in the form of sacramental

mating, which for a long time was a mysterious element among certain
cults, and reappeared in sects.[305] In the ceremonies of Zinzendorf’s
followers echoes of the coitus sacrament may be recognized; also in
other sects.

One can easily think that just as the above-mentioned Australian bushmen


perform the coitus play in this manner the same performance could be

enacted in another manner, and, indeed, in the form of fire production.
Instead of through two selected human beings, the coitus was represented
by two substitutes, by Purûravas and Urvaçi, by Phallus and Vulva, by
borer and opening. Just as the primitive thought behind other customs is


really the sacramental coition so here the primal tendency is really the

act itself. For the act of fertilization is the climax—the true festival
of life, and well worthy to become the nucleus of a religious mystery.


If we are justified in concluding that the symbolism of the hole in the


earth used by the Watschandies for the fertilization of the earth takes

the place of the coitus, then the generation of fire could be considered
in the same way as a substitute for coitus; and, indeed, it might be


further concluded as a consequence of this reasoning that the invention

of fire-making is also due to the need of supplying a symbol for the
sexual act.[306]

Let us return, for a moment, to the infantile symptom of boring. Let us


imagine a strong adult man carrying on the boring with two pieces of


wood with the same perseverance and the energy corresponding to that of

this child. He may very easily create fire by this play. But of greatest
significance in this work is the rhythm.[307] This hypothesis seems to
me psychologically possible, although it should not be said with this
that only in this way could the discovery of fire occur. It can result
just as well by the striking together of flints. It is scarcely possible
that fire was created in only one way. All I want to establish here is
merely the psychologic process, the symbolic indications of which point
to the possibility that in such a way was fire invented or prepared.


The existence of the primitive coitus play or rite seems to me

sufficiently proven. The only thing that is obscure is the energy and
emphasis of the ritual play. It is well known that those primitive rites
were often of very bloody seriousness, and were performed with an
extraordinary display of energy, which appears as a great contrast to
the well-known indolence of primitive humanity. Therefore, the ritual
activity entirely loses the character of play, and wins that of
purposeful effort. If certain Negro races can dance the whole night long
to three tones in the most monotonous manner, then, according to our
idea, there is in this an absolute lack of the character of play
pastime; it approaches nearer to exercise. There seems to exist a sort
of compulsion to transfer the libido into such ritual activity. If the
basis of the ritual activity is the sexual act, we may assume that it is
really the underlying thought and object of the exercise. Under these
circumstances, the question arises why the primitive man endeavors to
represent the sexual act symbolically and with effort, or, if this
wording appears to be too hypothetical, why does he exert energy to such
a degree only to accomplish practically useless things, which apparently
do not especially amuse him?[308] It may be assumed that the sexual act
is more desirable to primitive man than such absurd and, moreover,
fatiguing exercises. It is hardly possible but that a certain compulsion
conducts the energy away from the original object and real purpose,
inducing the production of surrogates. The existence of a phallic or
orgiastic cult does not indicate _eo ipso_ a particularly lascivious


life any more than the ascetic symbolism of Christianity means an

especially moral life. One honors that which one does not possess or
that which one is not. This compulsion, to speak in the nomenclature
formulated above, removes a certain amount of libido from the real
sexual activity, and creates a symbolic and practically valid substitute
for what is lost. This psychology is confirmed by the above-mentioned
Watschandie ceremony; during the entire ceremony none of the men may
look at a woman. This detail again informs us from whence the libido is
to be diverted. But this gives rise to the pressing question, Whence
comes this compulsion? We have already suggested above that the


primitive sexuality encounters a resistance which leads to a

side-tracking of the libido on to substitution actions (analogy,
symbolism, etc.). It is unthinkable that it is a question of any outer
opposition whatsoever, or of a real obstacle, since it occurs to no
savage to catch his elusive quarry with ritual charms; but it is a
question of an internal resistance; will opposes will; libido opposes
libido, since a psychologic resistance as an energic phenomenon
corresponds to a certain amount of libido. The psychologic compulsion


for the transformation of the libido is based on an original division of

the will. I will return to this primal splitting of the libido in
another place. Here let us concern ourselves only with the problem of
the transition of the libido. The transition takes place, as has been
repeatedly suggested by means of shifting to an analogy. The libido is
taken away from its proper place and transferred to another substratum.

The resistance against sexuality aims, therefore, at preventing the
sexual act; it also seeks to crowd the libido away from the sexual
function. We see, for example, in hysteria, how the specific repression
blocks the real path of transference; therefore, the libido is obliged
to take another path, and that an earlier one, namely, the incestuous
road which ultimately leads to the parents. Let us speak, however, of
the incest prohibition, which hindered the very first sexual
transference. Then the situation changes in so far that no earlier way
of transference is left, except that of the presexual stage of
development, where the libido was still partly in the function of
nutrition. By a regression to the presexual material the libido becomes
quasi-desexualized. But as the incest prohibition signifies only a
temporary and conditional restriction of the sexuality, thus only that


part of the libido which is best designated as the incestuous component

is now pushed back to the presexual stage. The repression, therefore,


concerns only that part of the sexual libido which wishes to fix itself

permanently upon the parents. The sexual libido is only withdrawn from
the incestuous component, repressed upon the presexual stage, and there,
if the operation is successful, desexualized, by which this amount of
libido is prepared for an asexual application. However, it is to be
assumed that this operation is accomplished only with difficulty,
because the incestuous libido, so to speak, must be artificially
separated from the sexual libido, with which, for ages, through the
whole animal kingdom, it was indistinguishably united. The regression of
the incestuous component must, therefore, take place, not only with
great difficulty, but also carry with it into the presexual stage a
considerable sexual character. The consequence of this is that the
resulting phenomena, although stamped with the character of the sexual
act, are, nevertheless, not really sexual acts _de facto_; they are
derived from the presexual stage, and are maintained by the repressed
sexual libido, therefore possess a double significance. Thus the fire
boring is a coitus (and, to be sure, an incestuous one), but a
desexualized one, which has lost its immediate sexual worth, and is,
therefore, indirectly useful to the propagation of the species. The


presexual stage is characterized by countless possibilities of

application, because the libido has not yet formed definite
localizations. It therefore appears intelligible that an amount of


libido which reaches this stage through regression is confronted with

manifold possibilities of application. Above all, it is met with the
possibility of a purely onanistic activity. But as the matter in
question in the regressive component of libido is sexual libido, the
ultimate object of which is propagation, therefore it goes to the
external object (Parents); it will also introvert with this destination
as its essential character. The result, therefore, is that the purely
onanistic activity turns out to be insufficient, and another object must
be sought for, which takes the place of the incest object. The nurturing
mother earth represents the ideal example of such an object. The
psychology of the presexual stage contributes the nutrition component;
the sexual libido the coitus idea. From this the ancient symbols of
agriculture arise. In the work of agriculture hunger and incest
intermingle. The ancient cults of mother earth and all the superstitions


founded thereon saw in the cultivation of the earth the fertilization of

the mother. The aim of the action is desexualized, however, for it is
the fruit of the field and the nourishment contained therein. The
regression resulting from the incest prohibition leads, in this case, to
the new valuation of the mother; this time, however, not as a sexual
object, but as a nourisher.


The discovery of fire seems to be due to a very similar regression to

the presexual stage, more particularly to the nearest stage of the
displaced rhythmic manifestation. The libido, introverted from the
incest prohibition (with the more detailed designation of the motor
components of coitus), when it reaches the presexual stage, meets the
related infantile boring, to which it now gives, in accordance with its
realistic destination, an actual material. (Therefore the material is
fittingly called “materia,” as the object is the mother as above.) As I
sought to show above, the action of the infantile boring requires only
the strength and perseverance of an adult man and suitable “material” in
order to generate fire. If this is so, it may be expected that analogous


to our foregoing case of onanistic boring the generation of fire

originally occurred as such an act of quasi-onanistic activity,
objectively expressed. The demonstration of this can never be actually
furnished, but it is thinkable that somewhere traces of this original
onanistic preliminary exercise of fire production have been preserved. I


have succeeded in finding a passage in a very old monument of Hindoo


literature which contains this transition of the sexual libido through