applications, which indicate a new kind of immortality; that is to say,
immortal work.

The environment of Hiawatha’s youth is of importance:

                 “By the shores of Gitche Gumee,
                 By the shining Big-Sea-Water,
                 Stood the wigwam of Nokomis,
                 Daughter of the Moon, Nokomis.
                 Dark behind it rose the forest,
                 Rose the black and gloomy pine-trees,
                 Rose the firs with cones upon them.
                 Bright before it beat the water,
                 Beat the clear and sunny water,
                 Beat the shining Big-Sea-Water.”

In this environment Nokomis brought him up. Here she taught him the
first words, and told him the first fairy tales, and the sounds of the
water and the wood were intermingled, so that the child learned not only
to understand man’s speech, but also that of Nature:

                “At the door on summer evenings
                Sat the little Hiawatha;
                Heard the whispering of the pine-trees,
                Heard the lapping of the water,
                Sounds of music, words of wonder:
                ‘Minne-wawa!’[641] said the pine-trees,
                ‘Mudway-aushka!’[642] said the water.”

Hiawatha hears human speech in the sounds of Nature; thus he understands
Nature’s speech. The wind says, “Wawa.” The cry of the wild goose is
“Wawa.” Wah-wah-taysee means the small glowworm which enchants him. Thus


the poet paints most beautifully the gradual gathering of external

nature into the compass of the subjective,[643] and the intimate


connection of the primary object to which the first lisping words were

applied, and from which the first sounds were derived, with the
secondary object, the wider nature which usurps imperceptibly the
mother’s place, and takes possession of those sounds heard first from
the mother, and also of those feelings which we all discover later in
ourselves in all the warm love of Mother Nature. The later blending,
whether pantheistic-philosophic or æsthetic, of the sentimental,
cultured man with nature is, looked at retrospectively, a reblending
with the mother, who was our primary object, and with whom we truly were
once wholly one.[644] Therefore, it is not astonishing when we again see
emerging in the poetical speech of a modern philosopher, Karl Joël, the
old pictures which symbolize the unity with the mother, illustrated by
the confluence of subject and object. In his recent book, “Seele und
Welt” (1912), Joël writes as follows, in the chapter called “Primal
Experience”[645]:

  “I lay on the seashore, the shining waters glittering in my dreamy
  eyes; at a great distance fluttered the soft breeze; throbbing,
  shimmering, stirring, lulling to sleep comes the wave beat to the
  shore—or to the ear? I know not. Distance and nearness become blurred
  into one; without and within glide into each other. Nearer and nearer,
  _dearer and more homelike sounds the beating of the waves_; now, like
  a thundering pulse in my head it strikes, and now it beats over my
  soul, devours it, embraces it, while it itself at the same time floats
  out like the blue waste of waters. Yes, without and within are one.
  Glistening and foaming, flowing and fanning and roaring, the entire
  symphony of the stimuli experienced sounds in one tone, all thought
  becomes one thought, which becomes one with feeling; the world exhales
  in the soul and the soul dissolves in the world. Our small life is
  encircled by a great sleep—_the sleep of our cradle, the sleep of our
  grave, the sleep of our home, from which we go forth in the morning,
  to which we again return in the evening_; our life but the short
  journey, the interval between the emergence from the original oneness
  and the sinking back into it! Blue shimmers the infinite sea, wherein
  dreams the jelly fish of the primitive life, toward which without
  ceasing our thoughts hark back dimly through eons of existence. For
  every happening entails a change and a guarantee of the unity of life.
  At that moment when they are no longer blended together, in that
  instant man lifts his _head, blind and dripping, from the depths_ of
  the stream of experience, from the oneness with the experience; at


  that moment of parting when the unity of life in startled surprise

  detaches the Change and holds it away from itself as something alien,


  at this moment of alienation the aspects of the experience have been

  substantialized into subject and object, and in that moment
  consciousness is born.”

Joël paints here, in unmistakable symbolism, the confluence of subject
and object as the reunion of mother and child. The symbols agree with
those of mythology, even in their details. The encircling and devouring
motive is distinctly suggested. The sea, devouring the sun and giving
birth to it anew, is already an old acquaintance. The moment of the rise
of consciousness, the separation of subject and object is a birth; truly


philosophical thought hangs with lame wings upon the few great primitive

pictures of human speech, above the simple, all-surpassing greatness of
which no thought can rise. The idea of the jelly fish is not
“accidental.” Once when I was explaining to a patient the maternal
significance of water at this contact with the mother complex, she
experienced a very unpleasant feeling. “It makes me squirm,” she said,
“as if I touched a jelly fish.” Here, too, the same idea! The blessed
state of sleep before birth and after death is, as Joël observed,
something like old shadowy memories of that unsuspecting, thoughtless
state of early childhood, where as yet no opposition disturbed the
peaceful flow of dawning life, to which the inner longing always draws
us back again and again, and from which the active life must free itself
anew with struggle and death, so that it may not be doomed to
destruction. Long before Joël, an Indian chieftain had said the same
thing in similar words to one of the restless wise men:

  “Ah, my brother, you will never learn to know the happiness of
  thinking nothing and doing nothing: this is next to sleep; this is the
  most delightful thing there is. Thus we were before birth, thus we
  shall be after death.”[646]

We shall see in Hiawatha’s later fate how important his early
impressions are in his choice of a wife. Hiawatha’s first deed was to
kill a roebuck with his arrow:

                   “Dead he lay there in the forest,
                   By the ford across the river.”

This is typical of Hiawatha’s deeds. Whatever he kills, for the most
part, lies _next to or in the water_, sometimes half in the water and
half on the land.[647] It seems that this must well be so. The later
adventures will teach us why this must be so. The buck was no ordinary
animal, but a magic one; that is to say, one with an additional
unconscious significance. Hiawatha made for himself gloves and moccasins
from its hide; the gloves imparted such strength to his arms that he
could crumble rocks to dust, and the moccasins had the virtue of the
seven-league boots. By enwrapping himself in the buck’s skin he really
became a giant. This motive, together with the death of the animal at
the ford,[648] in the water, reveals the fact that the parents are
concerned, whose gigantic proportions as compared with the child are of
great significance in the unconscious. The “toys of giants” is a wish
inversion of the infantile phantasy. The dream of an eleven-year-old
girl expresses this:

  “I am as high as a church steeple; then a policeman comes. I tell him,
  ‘If you say anything, I will cut off your head.’”

The “policeman,” as the analysis brought out, referred to the father,
whose gigantic size was over-compensated by the church steeple. In
Mexican human sacrifices, the gods were represented by criminals, who
were slaughtered, and flayed, and the Corybantes then clothed themselves
in the bloody skins, in order to illustrate the resurrection of the
gods.[649] (The snake’s casting of his skin as a symbol of
rejuvenation.)

Hiawatha has, therefore, conquered his parents, primarily the mother,
although in the form of a male animal (compare the bear of Mudjekeewis);
and from that comes his giant’s strength. He has taken on the parent’s
skin and now has himself become a great man. Now he started forth to his
first great battle to fight with the father Mudjekeewis, in order to
avenge his dead mother Wenonah. Naturally, under this figure of speech
hides the thought that he slays the father, in order to take possession
of the mother. Compare the battle of Gilgamesh with the giant Chumbaba
and the ensuing conquest of Ishtar. The father, in the psychologic
sense, merely represents the personification of the incest prohibition;
that is to say, resistance, which defends the mother. Instead of the
father, it may be a fearful animal (the great bear, the snake, the
dragon, etc.) which must be fought and overcome. The hero is a hero


because he sees in every difficulty of life resistance to the forbidden

treasure, and fights that resistance with the complete yearning which
strives towards the treasure, attainable with difficulty, or
unattainable, the yearning which paralyzes and kills the ordinary man.

Hiawatha’s father is Mudjekeewis, the west wind; the battle, therefore,
takes place in the west. Thence came life (impregnation of Wenonah);
thence also came death (death of Wenonah). Hiawatha, therefore, fights
the typical battle of the hero for rebirth in the western sea, the
battle with the devouring terrible mother, this time in the form of the
father. Mudjekeewis, who himself had acquired a divine nature, through
his conquest of the bear, now is overpowered by his son:

                 “Back retreated Mudjekeewis,
                 Rushing westward o’er the mountains,
                 Stumbling westward down the mountains,
                 Three whole days retreated fighting,


                 Still pursued by Hiawatha

                 To the doorways of the West-Wind,
                 To the portals of the Sunset,
                 To the earth’s remotest border,


                 Where into the empty spaces

                 Sinks the sun, as a flamingo
                 Drops into her nest at nightfall.”

The “three days” are a stereotyped form representing the stay in the sea
prison of night. (Twenty-first until twenty-fourth of December.) Christ,
too, remained three days in the underworld. “The treasure, difficult to
attain,” is captured by the hero during this struggle in the west. In
this case the father must make a great concession to the son; he gives
him divine nature,[650] that very wind nature, the immortality of which
alone protected Mudjekeewis from death. He says to his son:

                   “I will share my kingdom with you,
                   Ruler shall you be henceforward,
                   Of the Northwest-Wind, Keewaydin,
                   Of the home-wind, the Keewaydin.”

That Hiawatha now becomes ruler of the home-wind has its close parallel
in the Gilgamesh epic, where Gilgamesh finally receives the magic herb
from the wise old Utnapishtim, who dwells in the West, which brings him
safe once more over the sea to his home; but this, when he is home
again, is retaken from him by a serpent.

When one has slain the father, one can obtain possession of his wife,
and when one has conquered the mother, one can free one’s self.

On the return journey Hiawatha stops at the clever arrow-maker’s, who
possesses a lovely daughter:

                   “And he named her from the river,
                   From the water-fall he named her,
                   Minnehaha, Laughing Water.”

When Hiawatha, in his earliest childhood dreaming, felt the sounds of
water and wind press upon his ears, he recognized in these sounds of
nature the speech of his mother. The murmuring pine trees on the shore
of the great sea, said “Minnewawa.” And above the murmuring of the winds


and the splashing of the water he found his earliest childhood dreams