sense. The function of reality is lacking to such a degree that even the
motive power must be encroached upon in the loss. The sexual character
of this must be disputed absolutely,[249] for reality is not understood
to be a sexual function. Moreover, if that were so, the introversion of


the libido in the strict sense must have as a result a loss of reality

in the neuroses, and, indeed, a loss which could be compared with that
of dementia præcox. These facts have rendered it impossible for me to
transfer Freud’s theory of libido to dementia præcox, and, therefore, I
am of the opinion that Abraham’s investigation[250] is hardly tenable
theoretically, from the standpoint of the Freudian theory of libido. If


Abraham believes that through the withdrawal of the libido from the


outer world the paranoid system or the schizophrenic symptomatology

results, then this assumption is not justified from the standpoint of
the knowledge of that time, because a mere libido introversion and
regression leads, speedily, as Freud has clearly shown, into the
neuroses, and, strictly speaking, into the transference neuroses, and
not into dementia præcox. Therefore, the transference of the libido
theory to dementia præcox is impossible, because this illness produces a


loss of reality which cannot be explained by the deficiency of the

libido defined in this narrow sense.

It affords me especial satisfaction that our teacher also, when he laid
his hand on the delicate material of the paranoic psychology, was forced


to doubt the applicability of the conception of libido held by him at

that time. The sexual definition of this did not permit me to understand
those disturbances of function, which affect the vague territory of the
hunger instinct just as much as that of the sexual instinct. For a long
time the theory of libido seemed to me inapplicable to dementia præcox.
With increasing experience in analytical work, however, I became aware
of a gradual change in my conception of libido. In place of the
descriptive definition of the “Three Contributions” there gradually grew
up a generic definition of the libido, which rendered it possible for me
to replace the expression “psychic energy” by the term “libido.” I was
forced to ask myself whether indeed the function of reality to-day does


not consist only in its smaller part of libido sexualis and in the

greater part of other impulses? It is still a very important question
whether phylogenetically the function of reality is not, at least in
great part, of sexual origin. To answer this question directly in regard
to the function of reality is not possible, but we shall attempt to come
to an understanding indirectly.


A fleeting glance at the history of evolution is sufficient to teach

us that countless complicated functions to which to-day must be


denied any sexual character were originally pure derivations from

the general impulse of propagation. During the ascent through the


animal kingdom an important displacement in the fundamentals of the

procreative instinct has taken place. The mass of the reproductive


products with the uncertainty of fertilization has more and more


been replaced by a controlled impregnation and an effective

protection of the offspring. In this way part of the energy required


in the production of eggs and sperma has been transposed into the


creation of mechanisms for allurement and for protection of the

young. Thus we discover the first instincts of art in animals used
in the service of the impulse of creation, and limited to the
breeding season. The original sexual character of these biological


institutions became lost in their organic fixation and functional

independence. Even if there can be no doubt about the sexual origin
of music, still it would be a poor, unæsthetic generalization if one
were to include music in the category of sexuality. A similar


nomenclature would then lead us to classify the cathedral of Cologne

as mineralogy because it is built of stones. It can be a surprise


only to those to whom the history of evolution is unknown to find


how few things there really are in human life which cannot be

reduced in the last analysis to the instinct of procreation. It
includes very nearly everything, I think, which is beloved and dear
to us. We spoke just now of libido as the creative impulse and at


the same time we allied ourselves with the conception which opposes


libido to hunger in the same way that the instinct of the


preservation of the species is opposed to the instinct of

self-preservation. In nature, this artificial distinction does not
exist. Here we see only a continuous life impulse, a will to live


which will attain the creation of the whole species through the

preservation of the individual. Thus far this conception coincides
with the idea of the Will in Schopenhauer, for we can conceive Will
objectively, only as a manifestation of an internal desire. This


throwing of psychological perceptions into material reality is

characterized philosophically as “introjection.” (Ferenczi’s
conception of “introjection” denoted the reverse, that is, the
taking of the outer world into the inner world.)[251] Naturally, the
conception of the world was distorted by introjection. Freud’s


conception of the principle of desire is a voluntary formulation of

the idea of introjection, while his once more voluntarily conceived
“principle of reality” corresponds functionally to that which I
designate as “corrective of reality,” and R. Avenarius[252]
designates as “empiriokritische Prinzipialkoordination.” The
conception of power owes its existence to this very introjection;


this has already been said expressively by Galileo in his remark


that its origin is to be sought in the subjective perception of the

muscular power of the individual. Because we have already arrived at
the daring assumption that the libido, which was employed originally
in the exclusive service of egg and seed production, now appears
firmly organized in the function of nest-building, and can no longer
be employed otherwise; similarly this conception forces us to relate
it to every desire, including hunger. For now we can no longer make


any essential distinction between the will to build a nest and the

will to eat. This view brings us to a conception of libido, which


extends over the boundaries of the physical sciences into a

philosophical aspect—to a conception of the will in general. I must
give this bit of psychological “Voluntarismus” into the hands of the
philosophers for them to manage. For the rest I refer to the words
of Schopenhauer[253] relating to this. In connection with the
psychology of this conception (by which I understand neither
metapsychology nor metaphysics) I am reminded here of the cosmogenic
meaning of Eros in Plato and Hesiod,[254] and also of the orphic
figure of Phanes, the “_shining one_,” the first created, the
“father of Eros.” Phanes has also orphically the significance of
Priapus; he is a god of love, bisexual and similar to the Theban
Dionysus Lysios.[255] The orphic meaning of Phanes is similar to
that of the Indian Kâma, the god of love, which is also the
cosmogenic principle. To Plotinus, of the Neo-Platonic school, the
world-soul is the energy of the intellect.[256] Plotinus compares
“The One,” the creative primal principle, with light in general; the
intellect with the Sun (♂), the world-soul with the moon (♀). In
another comparison Plotinus compares “The One” with the Father, the
intellect with the Son.[257] The “One” designated as Uranus is
transcendent. The son as Kronos has dominion over the visible world.
The world-soul (designated as Zeus) appears as subordinate to him.
The “One,” or the Usia of the whole existence is designated by
Plotinus as hypostatic, also as the three forms of emanation, also
μία οὐσία ἐν τρισὶν ὑποστάσεσιν.[258] As Drews observed, this is
also the formula of the Christian Trinity (God the Father, God the
Son, and God the Holy Ghost) as it was decided upon at the councils
of Nicea and Constantinople.[259] It may also be noticed that


certain early Christian sectarians attributed a maternal

significance to the Holy Ghost (world-soul, moon). (See what follows
concerning Chi of Timæus.) According to Plotinus, the world-soul has
a tendency toward a divided existence and towards divisibility, the
_conditio sine qua non_ of all change, creation and procreation
(also a maternal quality). It is an “unending all of life” and
wholly energy; it is a living organism of ideas, which attain in it
effectiveness and reality.[260] The intellect is its procreator, its
father, which, having conceived it, brings it to development in
thought.[261]

  “What lies enclosed in the intellect, comes to development in the
  world-soul as logos, fills it with meaning and makes it as if
  intoxicated with nectar.”[262]

Nectar is analogous to soma, the drink of fertility and of life, also to
sperma. The soul is fructified by the intellect; as oversoul it is
called heavenly Aphrodite, as the undersoul the earthly Aphrodite. “It
knows the birth pangs,”[263] and so on. The bird of Aphrodite, the dove,
is not without good cause the symbol of the Holy Ghost.

This fragment of the history of philosophy, which may easily be
enlarged, shows the significance of the endopsychic perception of the
libido and of its symbolism in human thought.

In the diversity of natural phenomena we see the desire, the libido, in
the most diverse applications and forms. We see the libido in the stage
of childhood almost wholly occupied in the instinct of nutrition, which
takes care of the upbuilding of the body. With the development of the


body there are successively opened new spheres of application for the

libido. The last sphere of application, and surpassing all the others in
its functional significance, is sexuality, which seems at first almost
bound up with the function of nutrition. (Compare with this the


influence on procreation of the conditions of nutrition in lower animals

and plants.) In the territory of sexuality, the libido wins that
formation, the enormous importance of which has justified us in the use
of the term libido in general. Here the libido appears very properly as
an impulse of procreation, and almost in the form of an undifferentiated
sexual primal libido, as an energy of growth, which clearly forces the
individual towards division, budding, etc. (The clearest distinction


between the two forms of libido is to be found among those animals in


whom the stage of nutrition is separated from the sexual stage by a

chrysalis stage.)


From that sexual primal libido which produced millions of eggs and seeds


from one small creature derivatives have been developed with the great

limitation of the fecundity; derivatives in which the functions are
maintained by a special differentiated libido. This differentiated


libido is henceforth desexualized because it is dissociated from its

original function of egg and sperma production; nor is there any
possibility of restoring it to its original function. Thus, in general,


the process of development consists in an increasing transformation of


the primal libido which only produced products of generation to the

secondary functions of allurement and protection of the young. This now
presupposes a very different and very complicated relation to reality, a
true function of reality, which, functionally inseparable, is bound up
with the needs of procreation. Thus the altered mode of procreation


carries with it as a correlate a correspondingly heightened adaptation

to reality.[264]


In this way we attain an insight into certain primitive conditions of

the function of reality. It would be radically wrong to say that its
compelling power is a sexual one. It was a sexual one to a large extent.


The process of transformation of the primal libido into secondary

impulses always took place in the form of affluxes of sexual libido,
that is to say, sexuality became deflected from its original destination
and a portion of it turned, little by little, increasing in amount, into


the phylogenetic impulse of the mechanisms of allurement and of

protection of the young. This diversion of the sexual libido from the
sexual territory into associated functions is still taking place.[265]


Where this operation succeeds without injury to the adaptation of the

individual it is called _sublimation_. Where the attempt does not
succeed it is called _repression_.


The descriptive standpoint of psychology accepts the multiplicity of

instincts, among which is the sexual instinct, as a special phenomenon;
moreover, it recognizes certain affluxes of libido to non-sexual
instincts.

Quite otherwise is the genetic standpoint. It regards the multiplicity
of instincts as issuing from a relative unity, the primal libido;[266]
it recognizes that definite amounts of the primal libido are split off,
as it were, associated with the newly formed functions and finally
merged in them. As a result of this it is impossible, from the genetic
standpoint, to hold to the strictly limited conception of libido of the
descriptive standpoint; it leads inevitably to a broadening of the
conception. With this we come to the theory of libido that I have


surreptitiously introduced into the first part of this work for the