variations, which adds greatly to the extraordinary difficulty of the
interpretation of a particular myth without knowledge of all the others.
The meaning of this cycle of myths mentioned here is clear; it is the
longing _to attain rebirth through the return to the mother’s womb, that
is to say, to become as immortal as the sun_. This longing for the
mother is frequently expressed in our holy scriptures.[431] I recall,
particularly the place in the epistle to the Galatians, where it is said
(iv:26):

  (26) “But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us
  all.

  (27) “For it is written, Rejoice, thou barren that beareth not: break
  forth and cry, thou that travailest not: for the desolate hath many
  more children than she which hath an husband.

  (28) “Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise.

  (29) “But as he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was
  born after the spirit, even so it is now.

  (30) “Nevertheless, what sayeth the scripture? Cast out the bondwoman
  and her son; for the son of a bondwoman shall not be heir with the son
  of a freewoman.

  (31) “So, then, brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of
  the free.”


Chapter v:

  (1) “Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
  free.”

The Christians are the children of the City Above, a symbol of the
mother, not sons of the earthly city-mother, who is to be cast out; for
those born after the flesh are opposed to those born after the spirit,
who are not born from the mother in the flesh, but from a symbol for the
mother. One must again think of the Indians at this point, who say the
first people proceeded from the sword-hilt and a shuttle. The religious


thought is bound up with the compulsion to call the mother no longer

mother, but City, Source, Sea, etc. This compulsion can be derived from
the need to manifest an amount of libido bound up with the mother, but


in such a way that the mother is represented by or concealed in a

symbol. The symbolism of the city we find well-developed in the
revelations of John, where two cities play a great part, one of which is
insulted and cursed by him, the other greatly desired. We read in
Revelation (xvii:1):

  (1) “Come hither: I will shew unto thee the judgment of the great
  whore that sitteth on many waters.

  (2) “With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication and


  the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her

  fornication.

  (3) “So he carried me away in the spirit into the wilderness: and I
  saw a woman sit on a scarlet colored beast, full of the names of
  blasphemy, and having seven heads and ten horns.

  (4) “And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet colors, and
  decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden
  cup[432] in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her
  fornication.

  (5) “And upon her forehead was a name written: _Mystery. Babylon the
  great. The Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth._

  (6) “And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of saints, and with
  the blood of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her I wondered with
  a great admiration.”

Here follows an interpretation of the vision unintelligible to us, from
which we can only emphasize the point that the seven heads[433] of the
dragon means the seven hills upon which the woman sits. This is probably
a distinct allusion to Rome, the city whose temporal power oppressed the
world at the time of the Revelation. The waters upon which the woman
“the mother” sits are “peoples and throngs and nations and tongues.”
This also seems to refer to Rome, for she is the mother of peoples and
possessed all lands. Just as in common speech, for example, colonies are
called daughters, so the people subject to Rome are like members of a
family subject to the mother. In another version of the picture, the
kings of the people, namely, the fathers, commit fornication with this
mother. Revelation continues (xviii: 2):

  (2) “And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the
  Great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils,
  and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and
  hateful bird.

  (3) “For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her
  fornication.”

Thus this mother does not only become the mother of all abominations,
but also in truth the receptacle of all that is wicked and unclean. The
birds are images of souls;[434] therefore, this means all souls of the
condemned and evil spirits. Thus the mother becomes Hecate, the
underworld, the City of the damned itself. We recognize easily in the
ancient idea of the woman on the dragon,[435] the above-mentioned
representation of Echnida, the mother of the infernal horrors. Babylon
is the idea of the “terrible” mother, who seduces all people to whoredom
with devilish temptation, and makes them drunk with her wine. The
intoxicating drink stands in the closest relation to fornication, for it
is also a libido symbol, as we have already seen in the parallel of fire
and sun. After the fall and curse of Babylon, we find in Revelation
(xix:6–7) the hymn which leads from the under half to the upper half of
the mother, where now everything is possible which would be impossible
without the repression of incest:

  (6) “Alleluia, the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.

  (7) “Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him: for the
  marriage of the Lamb is come,[436] and his wife hath made herself
  ready.

  (8) “And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen,
  clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints.

  (9) “And he saith unto me, ‘Write, Blessed are they which are called
  unto the marriage supper of the Lamb.’”

The Lamb is the son of man who celebrates his marriage with the “woman.”
Who the “woman” is remains obscure at first. But Revelation (xxi:9)
shows us which “woman” is the bride, the Lamb’s wife:

  (9) “Come hither, I will show thee the bride, the Lamb’s wife.[437]

  (10) “And he carried me away in the spirit to a great and high
  mountain, and showed me that great city, the holy Jerusalem,
  descending out of heaven from God, having the glory of God.”

It is evident from this quotation, after all that goes before, that the
City, the heavenly bride, who is here promised to the Son, is the
mother.[438] In Babylon the impure maid was cast out, according to the
Epistle to the Galatians, so that here in heavenly Jerusalem the
mother-bride may be attained the more surely. It bears witness to the


most delicate psychologic perception that the fathers of the church who


formulated the canons preserved this bit of the symbolic significance of

the Christ mystery. It is a treasure house for the phantasies and myth
materials which underlie primitive Christianity.[439] The further


attributes which were heaped upon the heavenly Jerusalem make its

significance as mother overwhelmingly clear:

  (1) “And he shewed me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal,
  proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb.

  (2) “In the midst of the street of it, and on either side of the
  river, was there the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits,
  and yielded her fruit every month, and the leaves of the tree were for
  the healing of nations.

  (3) “And there shall be no more curse.”

In this quotation we come upon the symbol of the waters, which we found
in the mention of Ogyges in connection with the city. The maternal


significance of water belongs to the clearest symbolism in the realm of

mythology,[440] so that the ancients could say: ἠ θάλασσα—τῆς γενέσεως
σύμβολον.[441] From water comes life;[442] therefore, of the two gods
which here interest us the most, Christ and Mithra, the latter was born
beside a river, according to representations, while Christ experienced
his new birth in the Jordan; moreover, he is born from the Πηγή,[443]
the “sempiterni fons amoris,” the mother of God, who by the
heathen-Christian legend was made a nymph of the Spring. The “Spring” is
also found in Mithracism. A Pannonian dedication reads, “Fonti perenni.”
An inscription in Apulia is dedicated to the “Fons Aeterni.” In Persia,
Ardvîçûra is the well of the water of life. Ardvîçûra-Anahita is a
goddess of water and love (just as Aphrodite is born from foam). The
neo-Persians designate the Planet Venus and a nubile girl by the name
“Nahid.” In the temples of Anaitis there existed prostitute Hierodules
(harlots). In the Sakaeen (in honor of Anaitis) there, occurred ritual
combats as in the festival of the Egyptian Ares and his mother. In the
Vedas the waters are called Mâtritamâh—the most maternal.[443] All that
is living rises as does the sun, from the water, and at evening plunges
into the water. Born from the springs, the rivers, the seas, at death
man arrives at the waters of the Styx in order to enter upon the “night
journey on the sea.” The wish is that the black water of death might be
the water of life; that death, with its cold embrace, might be the
mother’s womb, just as the sea devours the sun, but brings it forth
again out of the maternal womb (Jonah motive[444]). Life believes not in
death.

            “In the flood of life, in the torrent of deeds,
            I toss up and down,
            I am blown to and fro!
            Cradle and grave,
            An eternal sea;
            A changing web,
            A glowing life.”          —_Goethe: Faust._

That ξύλον ζωῆς, the wood of life, or the tree of life, is a maternal
symbol would seem to follow from the previous deductions. The etymologic
connection of ὕο, ὕλε, υἱός, in the Indo-Germanic root suggests the


blending of the meanings in the underlying symbolism of mother and of

generation. The tree of life is probably, first of all, a fruit-bearing
genealogical tree, that is, a mother-image. Countless myths prove the
derivation of man from trees; many myths show how the hero is enclosed
in the maternal tree—thus dead Osiris in the column, Adonis in the
myrtle, etc. Numerous female divinities were worshipped as trees, from
which resulted the cult of the holy groves and trees. It is of
transparent significance when Attis castrates himself under a pine tree,


i. e. he does it because of the mother. Goddesses were often worshipped