infantile situation. This is the reason why so many people fall into
that very state towards which they have the greatest abhorrence.

That we were correct in our assumption that, in Miss Miller, it is a


question of the battle for independence is shown by her statement that

the hero’s departure from his father’s house reminds her of the fate of
the young Buddha, who likewise renounced all luxury to which he was born


in order to go out into the world to live out his destiny to its

completion. Buddha gave the same heroic example as did Christ, who
separated from his mother, and even spoke bitter words (Matthew, chap.


x. v. 34):

  “Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send
  peace, but a sword.

  (35) “For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and
  the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law against her
  mother-in-law.

  (36) “And a man’s foes shall be they of his own household.

  (37) “He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of
  me.”

Or _Luke_, chap. xii, v. 51:

  “Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay:
  but rather division.

  (52) “For from henceforth there shall be five in one house divided,
  three against two, and two against three.

  (53) “The father shall be divided against the son, and the son against
  the father; the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against
  the mother; the mother-in-law against the daughter-in-law, and the
  daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.”

Horus snatched from his mother her head adornment, the power. Just as
Adam struggled with Lilith, so he struggles for power. Nietzsche, in
“Human, All Too Human,” expressed the same in very beautiful words:

  “One may suppose that a mind, in which the ‘type of free mind’ is to
  ripen and sweeten at maturity, has had its decisive crisis in a great
  detachment, so that before this time it was just so much the more a


  fettered spirit and appeared chained forever to its corner and its

  pillar.[629] What binds it most firmly? What cords are almost
  untearable? Among human beings of a high and exquisite type, it would
  be duties: that reverence, which is suitable for youth, that modesty
  and tenderness for all the old honored and valued things, that
  thankfulness for the earth from which they grew, for the hand which
  guided them, for the shrine where they learnt to pray:—their loftiest
  moments themselves come to bind them the firmest, to obligate them the
  most permanently. The great detachment comes suddenly for people so
  bound.

  “‘Better to die than to live here,’—thus rings the imperative voice of
  seduction: and this here, this ‘at home’ is all, that it (the soul)
  has loved until now! A sudden terror and suspicion against that which
  it has loved, a lightning flash of scorn towards that which is called
  ‘duty,’ a rebellious, arbitrary, volcanic, impelling desire for
  travelling, for strange countries, estrangements, coolness, frigidity,
  disillusionments, a hatred of love, perhaps a sacrilegious touch and
  glance backwards[630] there where just now it adored and loved,
  perhaps a blush of shame over what it has just done, and at the same
  time an exultation over having done it, an intoxicating internal
  joyous thrill, in which a victory reveals itself—a victory? Over what?
  Over whom? An enigmatic, doubtful, questioning victory, but the first
  triumph. Of such woe and pain is formed the history of the great
  detachment. It is like a disease which can destroy men,—this first
  eruption of strength and will towards self-assertion.”[631]

The danger lies, as is brilliantly expressed by Nietzsche, in isolation
in one’s self:

  “Solitude surrounds and embraces him ever more threatening, ever more
  constricting, ever more heart-strangling, the terrible Goddess and
  Mater sæva cupidinum.”

The libido taken away from the mother, who is abandoned only
reluctantly, becomes threatening as a serpent, the symbol of death, for
the relation to the mother must cease, _must die, which itself almost
causes man’s death_. In “Mater sæva cupidinum” the idea attains rare,
almost conscious, perfection.


I do not presume to try to paint in better words than has Nietzsche the

psychology of the wrench from childhood.


Miss Miller furnishes us with a further reference to a material which

has influenced her creation in a more general manner; this is the great
Indian epic of Longfellow, “The Song of Hiawatha.”

If my readers have had patience to read thus far, and to reflect upon
what they have read, they frequently must have wondered at the number of


times I introduce for comparison such apparently foreign material and

how often I widen the base upon which Miss Miller’s creations rest.


Doubts must often have arisen whether it is justifiable to enter into

important discussions concerning the psychologic foundations of myths,


religions and culture in general on the basis of such scanty

suggestions. It might be said that behind the Miller phantasies such a
thing is scarcely to be found. I need hardly emphasize the fact that I,
too, have sometimes been in doubt. I had never read “Hiawatha” until, in
the course of my work, I came to this part. “Hiawatha,” a poetical
compilation of Indian myths, gives me, however, a justification for all
preceding reflections, because this epic contains an unusual number of
mythologic problems. This fact is probably of great importance for the
wealth of suggestions in the Miller phantasies. We are, therefore,
compelled to obtain an insight into this epic.

Nawadaha sings the songs of the epic of the hero Hiawatha, the friend of
man:

                 “There he sang of Hiawatha,
                 Sang the songs of Hiawatha,
                 Sang his wondrous birth and being,
                 How he prayed and how he fasted,
                 How he lived and toiled and suffered,
                 That the tribes of men might prosper,
                 That he might advance his people.”

The teleological meaning of the hero, as that symbolic figure which
unites in itself libido in the form of admiration and adoration, in


order to lead to higher sublimations by way of the symbolic bridges of

the myths, is anticipated here. Thus we become quickly acquainted with
Hiawatha as a savior, and are prepared to hear all that which must be
said of a savior, of his marvellous birth, of his early great deeds, and
his sacrifice for his fellow-men.

The first song begins with a fragment of evangelism: Gitche Manito, the
“master of life,” tired of the quarrels of his human children, calls his
people together and makes known to them the joyous message:

                “I will send a prophet to you,
                A Deliverer of the nations,
                Who shall guide you and shall teach you,
                Who shall toil and suffer with you.
                If you listen to his counsels,
                You will multiply and prosper.
                If his warnings pass unheeded,
                You will fade away and perish!”

Gitche Manito, the Mighty, “the creator of the nations,” is represented
as he stood erect “on the great Red Pipestone quarry.”

                  “From his footprints flowed a river,
                  Leaped into the light of morning,
                  O’er the precipice plunging downward
                  Gleamed like Ishkoodah, the comet.”


The water flowing from his footsteps sufficiently proves the phallic

nature of this creator. I refer to the earlier utterances concerning the
phallic and fertilizing nature of the horse’s foot and the horse’s
steps, and especially do I recall Hippocrene and the foot of
Pegasus.[632] We meet with the same idea in Psalm lxv, vv. 9 to 11:

  “Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it; thou makest it very
  plenteous.

  “The river of God is full of water; thou preparest their corn, for so
  thou providest for the earth.

  “Thou waterest her furrows: thou sendest rain into the little valleys
  thereof; thou makest it soft with the drops of rain, and blessest the
  increase of it.

  “Thou crownest the year with thy goodness; and thy paths drop
  fatness.”

Wherever the fertilizing God steps, there is fruitfulness. We already


have spoken of the symbolic meaning of treading in discussing the

nightmares. Kaineus passes into the depths, “splitting the earth with a
foot outstretched.” Amphiaraus, another chthonic hero, sinks into the
earth, which Zeus has opened for him by a stroke of lightning. (Compare
with that the above-mentioned vision of a hysterical patient, who saw a
black horse after a flash of lightning: identity of horse’s footstep and
flash of lightning.) By means of a flash of lightning heroes were made
immortal.[633] Faust attained the mothers when he stamped his foot.

  “Stamp and descend, stamping thou’lt rise again.”

The heroes in the sun-devouring myths often stamp at or struggle in the
jaws of the monster. Thus Tor stamped through the ship’s bottom in
battle with the monster, and _went as far as the bottom of the sea_.
(Kaineus.) (Concerning “kicking” as an infantile phantasy, see above.)


The regression of the libido to the presexual stage makes this


preparatory action of treading either a substitution for the coitus

phantasy or for the phantasy of re-entrance into the mother’s womb. The


comparison of water flowing from the footsteps with a comet is a light

symbolism for the fructifying moisture (sperma). According to an
observation by Humboldt (Kosmos), certain South American Indian tribes
call the meteors “urine of the stars.” Mention is also made of how
Gitche Manito makes fire. He blows upon a forest, so that the trees,
rubbing upon each other, burst into flame. This demon is, therefore, an
excellent libido symbol; he also produced fire.

After this prologue in the second song, the hero’s previous history is
related. The great warrior, Mudjekeewis (Hiawatha’s father), has
cunningly overcome the great bear, “the terror of the nations,” and
stolen from him the magic “belt of wampum,” a girdle of shells. Here we
meet the motive of the “treasure attained with difficulty,” which the
hero rescues from the monster. Who the bear is, is shown by the poet’s
comparisons. Mudjekeewis strikes the bear on his head after he has
robbed him of the treasure.

                 “With the heavy blow bewildered
                 Rose the great Bear of the mountains,
                 But his knees beneath him trembled,
                 And he whimpered _like a woman_.”

Mudjekeewis said derisively to him:

                 “Else you would not cry, and whimper,
                 Like a _miserable woman_!

                        ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

                 But you, Bear! sit here and whimper,
                 And disgrace your tribe by crying,
                 Like a wretched Shaugodaya,
                 Like a _cowardly old woman_!”


These three comparisons with a woman are to be found near each other on

the same page. Mudjekeewis has, like a true hero, once more torn life
from the jaws of death, from the all-devouring “terrible mother.” This
deed, which, as we have seen, is also represented as a journey to hell,
“night journey through the sea,” the conquering of the monster from
within, signifies at the same time entrance into the mother’s womb, a
rebirth, the results of which are perceptible also for Mudjekeewis. As
in the Zosimos vision, here too the entering one becomes the breath of
the wind or spirit. Mudjekeewis becomes the west wind, the fertilizing
breath, the father of winds.[634] His sons become the other winds. An
intermezzo tells of them and of their love stories, of which I will
mention only the courtship of Wabuns, the East Wind, because here the
erotic wooing of the wind is pictured in an especially beautiful manner.
Every morning he sees a beautiful girl in a meadow, whom he eagerly
courts:

                 “Every morning, gazing earthward,


                 Still the first thing he beheld there