  beautiful tree as an emblem of the deity they adored, and cutting off
  the side branches, they affixed two of the largest of them to the
  highest part of the trunk, in such a manner that those branches
  extended on each side like the arms of a man, and together with the
  body presented the appearance of a huge cross; and in the bark in
  several places was also inscribed the letter Τ (tau).”[558]

“The tree of knowledge” of the Hindoo Dschaina sect assumes human form;
it was represented as a mighty, thick trunk in the form of a human head,


from the top of which grew out two longer branches hanging down at the

sides and one short, vertical, uprising branch crowned by a bud or
blossom-like thickening.[559] Robertson in his “Evangelical Myths”


mentions that in the Assyrian system there exists the representation of

the divinity in the form of a cross, in which the vertical beam


corresponds to a human form and the horizontal beam to a pair of

conventionalized wings. Old Grecian idols such, for example, as were
found in large numbers in Aegina have a similar character, an
immoderately long head and arms slightly raised, wing-shaped, and in
front distinct breasts.[560]


I must leave it an open question as to whether the symbol of the cross


has any relation to the two pieces of wood in the religious fire

production, as is frequently claimed. It does appear, however, as if the
cross symbol actually still possessed the significance of “union,” for
this idea belongs to the fertility charm, and especially to the thought
of eternal rebirth, which is most intimately bound up with the cross.
The thought of “union,” expressed by the symbol of the cross, is met
with in “Timaios” of Plato, where the world soul is conceived as
stretched out between heaven and earth in the form of an X (Chi); hence
in the form of a “St. Andrew’s cross.” When we now learn, furthermore,
that the world soul contains in itself _the world as a body_, then this
picture inevitably reminds us of the mother.

  (_Dialogues of Plato._ Jowett, Vol. II, page 528.)

  “And in the center he put the soul, which he diffused through the
  whole, and also spread over all the body round about, and he made one
  solitary and only heaven, a circle moving in a circle, having such
  excellence as to be able to hold converse with itself, and needing no
  other friendship or acquaintance. Having these purposes in view he
  created the world to be a blessed god.”

This highest degree of inactivity and freedom from desire, symbolized
by the _being enclosed within itself_, signifies divine blessedness.


The only human prototype of this conception is the child in the

mother’s womb, or rather more, the adult man in the continuous embrace
of the mother, from whom he originates. Corresponding to this
mythologic-philosophic conception, the enviable Diogenes inhabited a
tub, thus giving mythologic expression to the blessedness and
resemblance to the Divine in his freedom from desire. Plato says as
follows of the bond of the world soul to the world body:

  “Now God did not make the soul after the body, although we have spoken
  of them in this order; for when he put them together he would never
  have allowed that the elder should serve the younger, but this is what
  we say at random, because we ourselves too are very largely affected
  by chance. Whereas he made the soul in origin and excellence prior to
  and older than the body, to be the ruler and mistress, of whom the
  body was to be the subject.”


It seems conceivable from other indications that the conception of the

soul in general is a derivative of the mother-imago, that is to say, a


symbolic designation for the amount of libido remaining in the

mother-imago. (Compare the Christian representation of the soul as the
bride of Christ.) The further development of the world soul in “Timaios”
takes place in an obscure fashion in mystic numerals. When the mixture
was completed the following occurred:

  “This entire compound he divided lengthways into two parts, which he
  joined to one another at the center like the figure of an X.”

This passage approaches very closely the division and union of Atman,
who, after the division, is compared to a man and a woman who hold each
other in an embrace. Another passage is worth mentioning:

  “After the entire union of the soul had taken place, according to the
  master’s mind, he formed all that is corporeal within this, and joined
  it together so as to penetrate it throughout.”

Moreover, I refer to my remarks about the maternal meaning of the world
soul in Plotinus, in Chapter II.


A similar detachment of the symbol of the cross from a concrete figure

we find among the Muskhogean Indians, who stretch above the surface of
the water (pond or stream) two ropes crosswise and at the point of
intersection throw into the water fruits, oil and precious stones as a
sacrifice.[561] Here the divinity is evidently the water, not the cross,
which designates the place of sacrifice only, through the point of
intersection. The sacrifice at the place of union indicates why this
symbol was a primitive charm of fertility,[562] why we meet it so
frequently in the prechristian era among the goddesses of love (mother
goddesses), especially among the Egyptians in Isis and the sun-god. We
have already discussed the continuous union of these two divinities. As
the cross (Tau [Τ], Crux Ansata) always recurs in the hand of Tum, the
supreme God, the hegemon of the Ennead, it may not be superfluous to say
something more of the destination of Tum. The Tum of On-Heliopolis bears
the name “the father of his mother”; what that means needs no
explanation; Jusas or Nebit-Hotpet, the goddess joined to him, _was
called sometimes the mother, sometimes the daughter, sometimes the wife
of the god_. The day of the beginning of autumn is designated in the
Heliopolitan inscriptions as the “festival of the goddess Jusasit,” as
“the arrival of the sister for the purpose of uniting with her father.”
It is the day in which “the goddess Mehnit completes her work, so that
the god Osiris may enter into the left eye.” (By which the moon is
meant.[563]) The day is also called the filling up of the sacred eye
with its needs. The heavenly cow with the moon eye, the cow-headed Isis,
takes to herself in the autumn equinox the seed which procreates Horus.
(Moon as keeper of the seed.) The “eye” evidently represents the
genitals, as in the myth of Indra, who had to bear spread over his whole
body the likeness of Yoni (vulva), on account of a Bathsheba outrage,


but was so far pardoned by the gods that the disgraceful likeness of

Yoni was changed into eyes.[564] The “pupil” in the eye is a child. The
great god becomes a child again; he enters the mother’s womb in order to
renew himself.[565] In a hymn it is said:

  “Thy mother, the heavens, stretches forth her arms to thee.”

In another place it is said:

  “Thou shinest, oh father of the gods, upon the back of thy mother,
  daily thy mother takes thee in her arms. When thou illuminatest the
  dwelling of night, thou unitest with thy mother, the heavens.”[566]

The Tum of Pitum-Heliopolis not only bears the Crux Ansata as a symbol,
but also has this sign as his most frequent surname, that is, ānχ or
ānχi, which means “life” or “the living.” He is chiefly honored as the
demon serpent, Agatho, of whom it is said, “The holy demon serpent
Agatho goes forth from the city Nezi.” The snake, on account of casting
its skin, is the symbol of renewal, as is the scarabæus, a symbol of the
sun, of whom it is said that he, being of masculine sex only, reproduces
himself.

The name Chnum (another name for Tum, always meaning “the sun-god”)
comes from the verb χnum, which means “to bind together, to unite.”[567]
Chnum appears chiefly as the potter, the moulder of his egg. The cross
seems, therefore, to be an extraordinarily condensed symbol; its supreme
meaning is that of the tree of life, and, therefore, is a symbol of the
mother. The symbolization in a human form is, therefore, intelligible.


The phallic forms of the Crux Ansata belong to the abstract meaning of

“life” and “fertility,” as well as to the meaning of “union,” which we
can now very properly interpret as _cohabitation with the mother for the
purpose of renewal_.[568] It is, therefore, not only a very touching but
also a very significant naïve symbolism when Mary, in an Old English
lament of the Virgin,[569] accuses the cross of being a false tree,
which unjustly and without reason destroyed “the pure fruit of her body,
her gentle birdling,” with a poisonous draught, the draught of death,
which is destined only for the guilty descendants of the sinner Adam.
Her son was not a sharer in that guilt. (Compare with this the cunning
of Isis with the fatal draught of love.) Mary laments:

  “Cross, thou art the evil stepmother of my son, so high hast thou hung
  him that I cannot even kiss his feet! Cross, thou art my mortal enemy,
  thou hast slain my little blue bird!”

The holy cross answers:

  “Woman, I thank thee for my honor: thy splendid fruit, which now I
  bear, shines as a red blossom.[570] Not alone to save thee but to save
  the whole world this precious flower blooms in thee.”[571]

Santa Crux says of the relation to each other of the two mothers (Isis
in the morning and Isis in the evening):

  “Thou hast been crowned as Queen of Heaven on account of the child,
  which thou hast borne. But I shall appear as the shining relic to the
  whole world, at the day of judgment. I shall then raise my lament for
  thy divine son innocently slain upon me.”


Thus the murderous mother of death unites with the mother of life in

bringing forth a child. In their lament for the dying God, and as
outward token of their union, Mary kisses the cross, and is reconciled
to it.[572] The naïve Egyptian antiquity has preserved for us the union
of the contrasting tendencies in the mother idea of Isis. Naturally this
imago is merely a symbol of the libido of the son for the mother, and
describes the conflict between love and incest resistance. The criminal


incestuous purpose of the son appears projected as criminal cunning in

the mother-imago. The separation of the son from the mother signifies
the separation of man from the generic consciousness of animals, from


that infantile archaic thought characterized by the absence of

individual consciousness.


It was only the power of the incest prohibition which created the

self-conscious individual, who formerly had been thoughtlessly one with
the tribe, and in this way alone did the idea of individual and final
death become possible. Thus through the sin of Adam death came into the
world. This, as is evident, is expressed figuratively, that is, in
contrast form. The mother’s defence against the incest appears to the
son as a malicious act, which delivers him over to the fear of death.


This conflict faces us in the Gilgamesh epic in its original freshness

and passion, where also the incest wish is projected onto the mother.

The neurotic who cannot leave the mother has good reasons; the fear of
death holds him there. It seems as if no idea and no word were strong
enough to express the meaning of this. Entire religions were constructed
in order to give words to the immensity of this conflict. This struggle


for expression which continued down through the centuries certainly


cannot have its source in the restricted realm of the vulgar conception