to follow the transformations of inanimate matter to the extent

necessary for them to be able to reproduce the process of nature,
creatively and through their own art, by means of which alone they could


have succeeded in putting themselves in possession of the force of

nature. That which they lacked was training in directed thinking, or, to
express it psychoanalytically, the ancients did not succeed in tearing
loose the libido which might be sublimated, from the other natural
relations, and did not turn voluntarily to anthropomorphism. The secret
of the development of culture lies in the _mobility of the libido_, and
in its capacity for transference. It is, therefore, to be assumed that
the directed thinking of our time is a more or less modern acquisition,
which was lacking in earlier times.

But with that we come to a further question, viz., what happens if we do
not think directedly? Then our thinking lacks the major idea, and the
feeling of direction which emanates from that.[26] We no longer compel
our thoughts along a definite track, but let them float, sink and mount
according to their own gravity. According to Kulpe[27] thinking is a
kind of inner will action, the absence of which necessarily leads to an
automatic play of ideas. James understands the non-directed thinking, or
“merely associative” thinking, as the ordinary one. He expresses himself
about that in the following manner:

  “Our thought consists for the great part of a series of images, one of
  which produces the other; _a sort of passive dream-state of which the
  higher animals are also capable_. This sort of thinking leads,
  nevertheless, to reasonable conclusions of a practical as well as of a
  theoretical nature.

  “As a rule, the links of this sort of irresponsible thinking, which
  are accidentally bound together, are empirically concrete things, not
  abstractions.”

We can, in the following manner, complete these definitions of William
James. This sort of thinking does not tire us; it quickly leads us away
from reality into phantasies of the past and future. Here, thinking in
the form of speech ceases, image crowds upon image, feeling upon
feeling; more and more clearly one sees a tendency which creates and
makes believe, not as it truly is, but as one indeed might wish it to
be.[28] The material of these thoughts which turns away from reality,
can naturally be only the past with its thousand memory pictures. The
customary speech calls this kind of thinking “dreaming.”


Whoever attentively observes himself will find the general custom of

speech very striking, for almost every day we can see for ourselves how,
when falling asleep, phantasies are woven into our dreams, so that
between the dreams of day and night there is not so great a difference.
Thus we have two forms of thinking—_directed thinking_ and _dream or
phantasy thinking_. The first, working for communication with speech
elements, is troublesome and exhausting; the latter, on the contrary,
goes on without trouble, working spontaneously, so to speak, with
reminiscences. The first creates innovations, adaptations, imitates
reality and seeks to act upon it. The latter, on the contrary, turns
away from reality, sets free subjective wishes, and is, in regard to
adaptation, wholly unproductive.[29]


Let us leave aside the query as to why we possess these two different

ways of thinking, and turn back to the second proposition, namely, how
comes it that we have two different ways of thinking? I have intimated


above that history shows us that directed thinking was not always as

developed as it is at present. In this age the most beautiful expression
of directed thinking is science, and the technic fostered by it. Both


things are indebted for their existence simply to an energetic education

in directed thinking. At the time, however, when a few forerunners of
the present culture, like the poet Petrarch, first began to appreciate
Nature understandingly[30] there was already in existence an equivalent
for our science, to wit, scholasticism.[31] This took its objects from
the phantasies of the past, and it gave to the mind a dialectic training
in directed thinking. The only success which beckoned the thinker was
rhetorical victory in disputation, and not a visible transformation of
reality.

The subjects of thinking were often astonishingly phantastical; for
example, questions were discussed, such as how many angels could have a
place on the point of a needle? Whether Christ could have done his work
of redemption equally well if he had come into the world as a pea? The
possibility of such problems, to which belong the metaphysical problems
in general, viz., to be able to know the unknowable, shows us of what


peculiar kind that mind must have been which created such things which

to us are the height of absurdity. Nietzsche had guessed, however, at


the biological background of this phenomenon when he spoke of the

“beautiful tension” of the Germanic mind which the Middle Ages created.
Taken historically, scholasticism, in the spirit of which persons of
towering intellectual powers, such as Thomas of Aquinas, Duns Scotus,
Abélard, William of Occam and others, have labored, is the mother of the
modern scientific attitude, and a later time will see clearly how and in


what scholasticism still furnishes living undercurrents to the science

of to-day. Its whole nature lies in dialectic gymnastics which have
raised the symbol of speech, the word, to an almost absolute meaning, so


that it finally attained to that substantiality which expiring antiquity

could lend to its _logos_ only temporarily, through attributes of
mystical valuation. The great work of scholasticism, however, appears to
be the foundation of firmly knitted intellectual sublimation, the
_conditio sine qua non_ of the modern scientific and technical spirit.

Should we go further back into history, we shall find that which to-day
we call science, dissolved into an indistinct cloud. The modern
culture-creating mind is incessantly occupied in stripping off all
subjectivity from experience, and in finding those formulas which bring
Nature and her forces to the best and most fitting expression. It would
be an absurd and entirely unjustified self-glorification if we were to


assume that we are more energetic or more intelligent than the

ancients—our materials for knowledge have increased, but not our
intellectual capacity. For this reason, we become immediately as


obstinate and insusceptible in regard to new ideas as people in the

darkest times of antiquity. Our knowledge has increased but not our
wisdom. The main point of our interest is displaced wholly into material
reality; antiquity preferred a mode of thought which was more closely
related to a phantastic type. Except for a sensitive perspicuity towards
works of art, not attained since then, we seek in vain in antiquity for


that precise and concrete manner of thinking characteristic of modern

science. We see the antique spirit create not science but mythology.
Unfortunately, we acquire in school only a very paltry conception of the
richness and immense power of life of Grecian mythology.

Therefore, at first glance, it does not seem possible for us to assume
that that energy and interest which to-day we put into science and
technic, the man of antiquity gave in great part to his mythology. That,
nevertheless, gives the explanation for the bewildering changes, the
kaleidoscopic transformations and new syncretistic groupings, and the
continued rejuvenation of the myths in the Grecian sphere of culture.
Here, we move in a world of phantasies, which, little concerned with the
outer course of things, flows from an inner source, and, constantly
changing, creates now plastic, now shadowy shapes. This phantastical
activity of the ancient mind created artistically _par excellence_. The


object of the interest does not seem to have been to grasp hold of the

“how” of the real world as objectively and exactly as possibly, but to
æsthetically adapt subjective phantasies and expectations. There was


very little place among ancient people for the coldness and disillusion

which Giordano Bruno’s thoughts on eternity and Kepler’s discoveries
brought to modern humanity. The naïve man of antiquity saw in the sun
the great Father of the heaven and the earth, and in the moon the
fruitful good Mother. Everything had its demons; they animated equally a
human being and his brother, the animal. Everything was considered
according to its anthropomorphic or theriomorphic attributes, as human
being or animal. Even the disc of the sun was given wings or four feet,
in order to illustrate its movement. Thus arose an idea of the universe
which was not only very far from reality, but was one which corresponded
wholly to subjective phantasies.

We know, from our own experience, this state of mind. It is an infantile
stage. To a child the moon is a man or a face or a shepherd of the
stars. The clouds in the sky seem like little sheep; the dolls drink,
eat and sleep; the child places a letter at the window for the
Christ-child; he calls to the stork to bring him a little brother or
sister; the cow is the wife of the horse, and the dog the husband of the
cat. We know, too, that lower races, like the negroes, look upon the
locomotive as an animal, and call the drawers of the table the child of
the table.

As we learn through Freud, the dream shows a similar type. Since the
dream is unconcerned with the real condition of things, it brings the
most heterogeneous matter together, and a world of impossibilities takes
the place of realities. Freud finds progression characteristic of
thinking when awake; that is to say, the advancement of the thought


excitation from the system of the inner or outer perception through the

“endopsychic” work of association, conscious and unconscious, to the
motor end; that is to say, towards innervation. In the dream he finds
the reverse, namely, regression of the thought excitation from the
preconscious or unconscious to the system of perception, by the means of


which the dream receives its ordinary impression of sensuous

distinctness, which can rise to an almost hallucinating clearness. The


dream thinking moves in a retrograde manner towards the raw material of

memory. “The structure of the dream thoughts is dissolved during the
progress of regression into its raw material.” The reanimation of the
original perception is, however, only one side of regression. The other
side is regression to the infantile memory material, which might also be
understood as regression to the original perception, but which deserves
especial mention on account of its independent importance. This
regression might, indeed, be considered as “historical.” The dream,
according to this conception, might also be described as _the substitute
of the infantile scene, changed through transference into the recent
scene_.

The infantile scene cannot carry through its revival; it must be
satisfied with its return as a dream. From this conception of the
historical side of regression, it follows consequently that the modes of
conclusion of the dream, in so far as one may speak of them, must show
at the same time an analogous and infantile character. This is truly the
case, as experience has abundantly shown, so that to-day every one who
is familiar with the subject of dream analysis confirms Freud’s
proposition that _dreams are a piece of the conquered life of the
childish soul_. Inasmuch as the childish psychic life is undeniably of
an archaic type, this characteristic belongs to the dream in quite an
unusual degree. Freud calls our attention to this especially.

  “The dream, which fulfils its wishes by a short, regressive path,


  affords us only an example of the primary method of working of the

  psychic apparatus, which has been abandoned by us as unsuitable. That
  which once ruled in the waking state, when the psychical life was
  still young and impotent, appears to be banished to the dream life, in
  somewhat the same way as the bow and arrow, those discarded, primitive
  weapons of adult humanity, have been relegated to the nursery.”[32]


All this experience suggests to us that we draw a parallel between the

phantastical, mythological thinking of antiquity and the similar
thinking of children, between the lower human races and dreams.[33] This
train of thought is not a strange one for us, but quite familiar through
our knowledge of comparative anatomy and the history of development,


which show us how the structure and function of the human body are the


results of a series of embryonic changes which correspond to similar

changes in the history of the race. Therefore, the supposition is
justified that ontogenesis corresponds in psychology to phylogenesis.
Consequently, it would be true, as well, that the state of infantile
thinking in the child’s psychic life, as well as in dreams, is nothing
but a re-echo of the prehistoric and the ancient.[34]

In regard to this, Nietzsche takes a very broad and remarkable
standpoint.[35]

  “In our sleep and in our dreams we pass through the whole thought of
  earlier humanity. I mean, in the same way that man reasons in his
  dreams, he reasoned when in the waking state many thousands of years.
  The first _causa_ which occurred to his mind in reference to anything
  that needed explanation, satisfied him and passed for truth. In the


  dream this atavistic relic of humanity manifests its existence within