and bad, the problem in Faust is a pronouncedly erotic one; viz., the
battle between sublimation and eros, in which the Devil is strikingly
characterized through the fitting rôle of the erotic tempter. The erotic
is lacking in Job; at the same time Job is not conscious of the conflict
within his own soul; he even continuously disputes the arguments of his
friends who wish to convince him of evil in his own heart. To this
extent, one might say that Faust is considerably more honorable since he
openly confesses to the torments of his soul.

Miss Miller acts like Job; she says nothing, and lets the evil and the
good come from the other world, from the metapsychologic. Therefore, the
identification with Job is also significant in this respect. A wider,
and, indeed, a very important analogy remains to be mentioned. The
creative power, which love really is, rightly considered from the
natural standpoint, remains as the real attribute of the Divinity,
sublimated from the erotic impression; therefore, in the poem God is
praised throughout as Creator.

Job offers the same illustration. Satan is the destroyer of Job’s
fruitfulness. God is the fruitful one himself, therefore, at the end of
the book, he gives forth, as an expression of his own creative power,
this hymn, filled with lofty poetic beauty. In this hymn, strangely
enough, two unsympathetic representatives of the animal kingdom,
behemoth and the leviathan, both expressive of the crudest force
conceivable in nature, are given chief consideration; the behemoth being
really the phallic attribute of the God of Creation.

      “Behold now behemoth, which I made as well as thee;
      He eateth grass as an ox.
      Lo, now; his strength is in his loins,
      And his force is in the muscles of his belly.
      He moveth his tail like a cedar:
      The sinews of his thighs are knit together.
      His bones are as tubes of brass;
      His limbs are like bars of iron.
      He is the chief of the ways of God:
      He only that made him giveth him his sword....
      Behold, if a river overflow, he trembleth not;
      He is confident though a Jordan swell even to his mouth.
      Shall any take him when he is on the watch.
      Or pierce through his nose with a snare?
      Canst thou draw leviathan with a fish-hook?
      Or press down his tongue with a cord?...
      Lay thy hand upon him;
      Remember the battle and do no more.
      None is so fierce that dare stir him up:
      Who then is he that can stand before me?
      Who hath first given unto me, that I should repay him?
      Whatsoever is under the whole heaven is mine.”
                        —_Job_ xl: 15–20, 23–24; xli: 1, 8, 10–11.


God says this in order to bring his power and omnipotence impressively

before Job’s eyes. God is like the behemoth and the leviathan; the
fruitful nature giving forth abundance,—the untamable wildness and
boundlessness of nature,—and the overwhelming danger of the unchained
power.[80]

But what has destroyed Job’s earthly paradise? The unchained power of
nature. As the poet lets it be seen here, God has simply turned his
other side outwards for once; the side which man calls the devil, and
which lets loose all the torments of nature on Job, naturally for the
purpose of discipline and training. The God who created such
monstrosities, before whom the poor weak man stiffens with anxiety,
truly must hide qualities within himself which are food for thought.
This God lives in the heart, in the unconscious, in the realm of
metapsychology. There is the source of the anxiety before the
unspeakably horrible, and of the strength to withstand the horrors. The
person, that is to say his conscious “I,” is like a plaything, like a
feather which is whirled around by different currents of air; sometimes
the sacrifice and sometimes the sacrificer, and he cannot hinder either.
The Book of Job shows us God at work both as creator and destroyer. Who
is this God? A thought which humanity in every part of the world and in


all ages has brought forth from itself and always again anew in similar

forms; a power in the other world to which man gives praise, a power
which creates as well as destroys, an idea necessary to life. Since,
psychologically understood, the divinity is nothing else than a


projected complex of representation which is accentuated in feeling

according to the degree of religiousness of the individual, so God is to
be considered as the representative of a certain sum of energy (libido).
This energy, therefore, appears projected (metaphysically) because it
works from the unconscious outwards, when it is dislodged from there, as
psychoanalysis shows. As I have earlier made apparent in the “Bedeutung
des Vaters,” the religious instinct feeds upon the incestuous libido of
the infantile period. In the principal forms of religion which now
exist, the father transference seems to be at least the moulding
influence; in older religions, it seems to be the influence of the
mother transference which creates the attributes of the divinity. The
attributes of the divinity are omnipotence, a sternly persecuting
paternalism ruling through fear (Old Testament) and a loving paternalism
(New Testament). These are the attributes of the libido in that wide
sense in which Freud has conceived this idea empirically. In certain


pagan and also in certain Christian attributes of divinity the maternal

stands out strongly, and in the former the animal also comes into the
greatest prominence.[81] Likewise, the infantile, so closely interwoven
with religious phantasies, and from time to time breaking forth so
violently, is nowhere lacking.[82] All this points to the sources of the
dynamic states of religious activity. These are those impulses which in


childhood are withdrawn from incestuous application through the

intervention of the incest barrier and which, especially at the time of
puberty, as a result of affluxes of libido coming from the still
incompletely employed sexuality, are aroused to their own peculiar
activity. As is easily understood, that which is valuable in the
God-creating idea is not the form but the power, the libido. The
primitive power which Job’s Hymn of Creation vindicates, the
unconditional and inexorable, the unjust and the superhuman, are truly
and rightly attributes of libido, which “lead us unto life,” which “let
the poor be guilty,” and against which struggle is in vain. Nothing
remains for mankind but to work in harmony with this will. Nietzsche’s
“Zarathustra” teaches us this impressively.


We see that in Miss Miller the religious hymn arising from the

unconscious is the compensating amend for the erotic; it takes a great


part of its materials from the infantile reminiscences which she

reawakened into life by the introversion of the libido. Had this
religious creation not succeeded (and also had another sublimated
application been eliminated) then Miss Miller would have yielded to the
erotic impression, either to its natural consequence or to a negative
issue, which would have replaced the lost success in love by a
correspondingly strong sorrow. It is well known that opinions are much
divided concerning the worth of this issue of an erotic conflict, such
as Miss Miller has presented to us. It is thought to be much more
beautiful to solve unnoticed an erotic tension, in the elevated feelings
of religious poetry, in which perhaps many other people can find joy and
consolation. One is wrong to storm against this conception from the
radical standpoint of fanaticism for truth.


I think that one should view with philosophic admiration the strange


paths of the libido and should investigate the purposes of its

circuitous ways.

It is not too much to say that we have herewith dug up the erotic root,
and yet the problem remains unsolved. Were there not bound up with that
a mysterious purpose, probably of the greatest biological meaning, then


certainly twenty centuries would not have yearned for it with such

intense longing. Doubtless, this sort of libidian current moves in the
same direction as, taken in the widest sense, did that ecstatic ideal of
the Middle Ages and of the ancient mystery cults, one of which became
the later Christianity. There is to be seen biologically in this ideal
an exercise of psychologic projection (of the paranoidian mechanism, as
Freud would express it).[83] The projection consists in the repressing


of the conflict into the unconscious and the setting forth of the

repressed contents into seeming objectivity, which is also the formula
of paranoia. The repression serves, as is well known, for the freeing


from a painful complex from which one must escape by all means because

its compelling and oppressing power is feared. The repression can lead


to an apparent complete suppression which corresponds to a strong

self-control. Unfortunately, however, self-control has limits which are
only too narrowly drawn. Closer observation of people shows, it is true,
that calm is maintained at the critical moment, but certain results
occur which fall into two categories.

_First_, the suppressed effect comes to the surface immediately
afterwards; seldom directly, it is true, but ordinarily in the form of a
displacement to another object (e. g. a person is, in official
relations, polite, submissive, patient, and so on, and turns his whole
anger loose upon his wife or his subordinates).

_Second_, the suppressed effect creates compensations elsewhere. For
example, people who strive for excessive ethics, who try always to
think, feel, and act altruistically and ideally, avenge themselves,
because of the impossibility of carrying out their ideals, by subtle
maliciousness, which naturally does not come into their own
consciousness as such, but which leads to misunderstandings and unhappy
situations. Apparently, then, all of these are only “especially
unfortunate circumstances,” or they are the guilt and malice of other
people, or they are tragic complications.

One is, indeed, freed of the conscious conflict, nevertheless it lies
invisible at one’s feet, and is stumbled over at every step. The technic


of the apparent suppressing and forgetting is inadequate because it is

not possible of achievement in the last analysis—it is in reality a mere
makeshift. The religious projection offers a much more effectual help.
In this one keeps the conflict in sight (care, pain, anxiety, and so on)
and gives it over to a personality standing outside of one’s self, the
Divinity. The evangelical command teaches us this:

  “Cast all your anxiety upon him, because he careth for you.”—_I Peter_
  v: 7.

  “In nothing be anxious; but in every thing by prayer and
  supplication ... let your requests be made known unto God.”—_Phil._
  iv: 6.


One must give the burdening complex of the soul consciously over to the

Deity; that is to say, associate it with a definite representation
complex which is set up as objectively real, as a person who answers
those questions, for us unanswerable. To this inner demand belongs the


candid avowal of sin and the Christian humility presuming such an

avowal. Both are for the purpose of making it possible for one to
examine one’s self and to know one’s self.[84] One may consider the


mutual avowal of sins as the most powerful support to this work of

education (“Confess, therefore, your sins one to another.”—James v: 16).
These measures aim at a conscious recognition of the conflicts,
thoroughly psychoanalytic, which is also _a conditio sine qua non_ of
the psychoanalytic condition of recovery. Just as psychoanalysis in the
hands of the physician, a secular method, sets up the real object of


transference as the one to take over the conflicts of the oppressed and