development. An extraordinarily important task, which even to-day is
hardly possible, is to give a systematic description of phantastic
thinking. One may, at the most, sketch it. While directed thinking is a
phenomenon conscious throughout,[49] the same cannot be asserted of
phantastic thinking. Doubtless, a great part of it still falls entirely
in the realm of the conscious, but, at least, just as much goes along in
half shadows, and generally an undetermined amount in the unconscious;
and this can, therefore, be disclosed only indirectly.[50] By means of
phantastic thinking, directed thinking is connected with the oldest
foundations of the human mind, which have been for a long time beneath
the threshold of the consciousness. The products of this phantastic
thinking arising directly from the consciousness are, first, waking
dreams, or day-dreams, to which Freud, Flournoy, Pick and others have
given special attention; then the dreams which offer to the
consciousness, at first, a mysterious exterior, and win meaning only
through the indirectly inferred unconscious contents. Lastly, there is a
so-called wholly unconscious phantasy system in the split-off complex,


which exhibits a pronounced tendency towards the production of a

dissociated personality.[51]


Our foregoing explanations show wherein the products arising from the

unconscious are related to the mythical. From all these signs it may be
concluded that the soul possesses in some degree historical strata, the
oldest stratum of which would correspond to the unconscious. The result
of that must be that an introversion occurring in later life, according
to the Freudian teaching, seizes upon regressive infantile reminiscences
taken from the individual past. That first points out the way; then,
with stronger introversion and regression (strong repressions,
introversion psychoses), there come to light pronounced traits of an
archaic mental kind which, under certain circumstances, might go as far
as the re-echo of a once manifest, archaic mental product.

This problem deserves to be more thoroughly discussed. As a concrete
example, let us take the history of the pious Abbé Oegger which Anatole
France has communicated to us.[52] This priest was a hypercritical man,
and much given to phantasies, especially in regard to one question,
viz., the fate of Judas; whether he was really damned, as the teaching
of the church asserts, to everlasting punishment, or whether God had
pardoned him after all. Oegger sided with the intelligent point of view
that God, in his all-wisdom, had chosen Judas as an instrument, in order


to bring about the highest point of the work of redemption by

Christ.[53] This necessary instrument, without the help of which the
human race would not have been a sharer in salvation, could not possibly
be damned by the all-good God. In order to put an end to his doubts,
Oegger went one night to the church, and made supplication for a sign
that Judas was saved. Then he felt a heavenly touch upon his shoulder.
Following this, Oegger told the Archbishop of his resolution to go out
into the world to preach God’s unending mercy.

Here we have a richly developed phantasy system before us. It is


concerned with the subtle and perpetually undecided question as to

whether the legendary figure of Judas is damned or not. The Judas legend
is, in itself, mythical material, viz., the malicious betrayal of a
hero. I recall Siegfried and Hagen, Balder and Loki. Siegfried and


Balder were murdered by a faithless traitor from among their closest

associates. This myth is moving and tragic—it is not honorable battle
which kills the noble, but evil treachery. It is, too, an occurrence
which is historical over and over again. One thinks of Cæsar and Brutus.
Since the myth of such a deed is very old, and still the subject of
teaching and repetition, it is the expression of a psychological fact,
that envy does not allow humanity to sleep, and that all of us carry, in
a hidden recess of our heart, a deadly wish towards the hero. This rule
can be applied generally to mythical tradition. _It does not set forth
any account of the old events, but rather acts in such a way that it
always reveals a thought common to humanity, and once more rejuvenated._
Thus, for example, the lives and deeds of the founders of old religions
are the purest condensations of typical, contemporaneous myths, behind
which the individual figure entirely disappears.[54]

But why does our pious Abbé torment himself with the old Judas legend?
He first went into the world to preach the gospel of mercy, and then,
after some time, he separated from the Catholic church and became a
Swedenborgian. Now we understand his Judas phantasy. _He was the Judas_
who betrayed his Lord. Therefore, first of all, he had to make sure of
the divine mercy, in order to be Judas in peace.


This case throws a light upon the mechanism of the phantasies in

general. The known, conscious phantasy may be of mythical or other
material; it is not to be taken seriously as such, for it has an
indirect meaning. If we take it, however, as important per se, then the
thing is not understandable, and makes one despair of the efficiency of
the mind. But we saw, in the case of Abbé Oegger, that his doubts and
his hopes did not turn upon the historical problem of Judas, but upon
his own personality, which wished to win a way to freedom for itself
through the solution of the Judas problem.

_The conscious phantasies tell us of mythical or other material of
undeveloped or no longer recognized wish tendencies in the soul._ As is
easily to be understood, an innate tendency, an acknowledgment of which
one refuses to make, and which one treats as non-existent, can hardly
contain a thing that may be in accord with our conscious character. It
concerns the tendencies which are considered immoral, and as generally
impossible, and the strongest resentment is felt towards bringing them
into the consciousness. What would Oegger have said had he been told
confidentially that he was preparing himself for the Judas rôle? And
what in ourselves do we consider immoral and non-existent, or which we
at least wish were non-existent? It is that which in antiquity lay
widespread on the surface, viz., sexuality in all its various
manifestations. Therefore, we need not wonder in the least when we find
this at the base of most of our phantasies, even if the phantasies have
a different appearance. Because Oegger found the damnation of Judas
incompatible with God’s goodness, he thought about the conflict in that
way; that is the conscious sequence. Along with this is the unconscious
sequence; because Oegger himself wished to be a Judas, he first made
sure of the goodness of God. To Oegger, Judas was the symbol of his own
unconscious tendency, and he made use of this symbol in order to be able
to meditate over his unconscious wish. The direct coming into
consciousness of the Judas wish would have been too painful for him.
_Thus, there must be typical myths which are really the instruments of a
folk-psychological complex treatment._ Jacob Burckhardt seems to have


suspected this when he once said that every Greek of the classical era

carried in himself a fragment of the Oedipus, just as every German
carries a fragment of Faust.[55]

The problem which the simple story of the Abbé Oegger has brought


clearly before us confronts us again when we prepare to examine


phantasies which owe their existence this time to an exclusively

unconscious work. We are indebted for the material which we will use in
the following chapters to the useful publication of an American woman,
Miss Frank Miller, who has given to the world some poetical
unconsciously formed phantasies under the title, “Quelque faits
d’imagination créatrice subconsciente.”—_Vol. V., Archives de
Psychologie, 1906._[56]


                               CHAPTER II


                         THE MILLER PHANTASIES

We know, from much psychoanalytic experience, that whenever one recounts
his phantasies or his dreams, he deals not only with the most important
and intimate of his problems, but with the one the most painful at that
moment.[57]


Since in the case of Miss Miller we have to do with a complicated

system, we must give our attention carefully to the particulars which I
will discuss, following as best I can Miss Miller’s presentation.

In the first chapter, “Phénomènes de suggestion passagère ou
d’autosuggestion instantanée,” Miss Miller gives a list of examples of
her unusual suggestibility, which she herself considers as a symptom of
her nervous temperament; for example, she is excessively fond of caviar,
whereas some of her relatives loathe it. However, as soon as any one
expresses his loathing, she herself feels momentarily the same loathing.


I do not need to emphasize especially the fact that such examples are

very important in individual psychology; that caviar is a food for which
nervous women frequently have an especial predilection, is a fact well
known to the psychoanalyst.

Miss Miller has an extraordinary faculty for taking other people’s
feelings upon herself, and of identification; for example, she
identifies herself to such a degree in “Cyrano” with the wounded
Christian de Neuvillette, that she feels in her own breast a truly
piercing pain at that place where Christian received the deadly blow.

From the viewpoint of analytic psychology, the theatre, aside from any
esthetic value, may be considered as an institution for the treatment of
the mass complex. The enjoyment of the comedy, or of the dramatic plot
ending happily is produced by an unreserved identification of one’s own
complexes with the play. The enjoyment of tragedy lies in the thrilling
yet satisfactory feeling that something which might occur to one’s self
is happening to another. The sympathy of our author with the dying


Christian means that there is in her a complex awaiting a similar

solution, which whispers softly to her “hodie tibi, cras mihi,” and that


one may know exactly what is considered the effectual moment Miss Miller

adds that she felt a pain in her breast, “Lorsque Sarah Bernhardt se
précipite sur lui pour étancher le sang de sa blessure.” Therefore the


effectual moment is when the love between Christian and Roxane comes to

a sudden end.

If we glance over the whole of Rostand’s play, we come upon certain
moments, the effect of which one cannot easily escape and which we will
emphasize here because they have meaning for all that follows. Cyrano de
Bergerac, with the long ugly nose, on account of which he undertakes
countless duels, loves Roxane, who, for her part unaware of it, loves
Christian, because of the beautiful verses which really originate from
Cyrano’s pen, but which apparently come from Christian. Cyrano is the
misunderstood one, whose passionate love and noble soul no one suspects;
the hero who sacrifices himself for others, and, dying, just in the
evening of life, reads to her once more Christian’s last letter, the
verses which he himself had composed.

           “Roxane, adieu, je vais mourir!
           C’est pour ce soir, je crois, ma bien-aimée!
           J’ai l’âme lourde encore d’amour inexprimé.
           Et je meurs! Jamais plus, jamais mes yeux grisés,
           Mes regards dont c’était les frémissantes fêtes,
           Ne baiseront au vol les gestes que vous faites;
           J’en revois un petit qui vous est familier
           Pour toucher votre front et je voudrais crier—.
                 Et je crie:
           Adieu!—Ma chère, ma chérie,
           Mon trésor—mon amour!
           Mon coeur ne vous quitta jamais une seconde,
           Et je suis et je serai jusque dans l’autre monde
           Celui qui vous aime sans mesure, celui—”

Whereupon Roxane recognizes in him the real loved one. It is already too
late; death comes; and in agonized delirium, Cyrano raises himself, and
draws his sword:

               “Je crois, qu’elle regarde....
               Qu’elle ose regarder mon nez, la camarde!

                          (Il lève son épée.)

        Que dites-vous?... C’est inutile!
              Je le sais!
        Mais on ne se bat pas dans l’espoir du succès!
        Non! Non! C’est bien plus beau, lorsque c’est inutile!

        —Qu’est-ce que c’est que tous ceux-là?—Vous êtes mille?
        Ah! je vous reconnais, tous mes vieux ennemis!
        Le mensonge!

                    (Il frappe de son épée le vide.)

                  Tiens, tiens, ha! ha! les Compromis,
                  Les Préjugés, les Lâchetés!...

                              (Il frappe.)

               Que je pactise?
         Jamais, jamais!—Ah, te voilà, toi, la Sottise!