hint of the unconscious in the following monologue of Chiwantopel. He
cries sadly:

  “In all the world, there is not a single one! I have sought among a
  hundred tribes. I have watched a hundred moons, since I began. Can it
  be that there is not a solitary being who will ever know my soul? Yes,
  by the sovereign God, yes! But ten thousand moons will wax and wane
  before that pure soul is born. And it is from another world that her
  parents will come to this one. She will have pale skin and pale locks.
  She will know sorrow before her mother bears her. Suffering will
  accompany her; she will seek also, and she will find, no one who
  understands her. Temptation will often assail her soul—but she will
  not yield. In her dreams, I will come to her, and she will understand.
  _I have kept my body inviolate._ I have come ten thousand moons before
  her epoch, and she will come ten thousand moons too late. But she will
  understand! There is only once in all the ten thousand moons that a
  soul like hers is born.”

Thereupon a green _serpent darts from the bushes, glides towards him and
stings him on the arm, then attacks the horse, which succumbs first_.
Then Chiwantopel says to his horse:

  “‘Adieu, faithful brother! Enter into rest! I have loved you, and you
  have served me well. Adieu. Soon I will rejoin you!’ Then to the
  snake: ‘Thanks, little sister, you have _put an end to my
  wanderings_.’”

Then he cried with grief and spoke his prayer:

  “‘Sovereign God, take me soon! I have tried to know thee, and to keep
  thy law! O, do not suffer my body to fall into corruption and decay,
  and to furnish the vultures with food!’ A smoking crater is perceived
  at a distance, the rumbling of an earthquake is heard, followed by a
  trembling of the ground.”

Chiwantopel cries in the delirium of suffering, while the earth covers
his body:

  “I have kept my body inviolate. Ah! She understands. Ja-ni-wa-ma,
  Ja-ni-wa-ma, thou who comprehendeth me.”

Chiwantopel’s prophecy is a repetition of Longfellow’s “Hiawatha,” where
the poet could not escape sentimentality, and at the close of the career
of the hero, Hiawatha, he brings in the Savior of the white people, in


the guise of the arriving illustrious representatives of the Christian

religion and morals. (One thinks of the work of redemption of the
Spaniards in Mexico and Peru!) With this prophecy of Chiwantopel, the


personality of the author is again placed in the closest relation to the

hero, and, indeed, as the real object of Chiwantopel’s longing. Most
certainly the hero would have married her, had she lived at his time;
but, unfortunately, she comes too late. The connection proves our
previous assertion that the libido moves round in a circle. The author
loves herself; that is to say, she, as the hero, is sought by one who
comes too late. This motive of coming too late is characteristic of the
infantile love: the father and the mother cannot be overtaken. The


separation of the two personalities by ten thousand moons is a wish

fulfilment; with that the incest relation is annulled in an effectual
manner. This white heroine will seek without being understood. (She is
not understood, because she cannot understand herself rightly.) And she
will not find. But in dreams, at least, they will find each other, “and
she will understand.” The next sentence of the text reads:

  “I have kept my body inviolate.”

This proud sentence, which naturally only a woman can express, because
man is not accustomed to boast in that direction, again confirms the
fact that all enterprises have remained but dreams, that the body has
remained “inviolate.” When the hero visits the heroine in a dream, it is
clear what is meant. This assertion of the hero’s, that he has remained
inviolate, refers back to the unsuccessful attempt upon his life in the
previous chapter (huntsman with the arrow), and clearly explains to us
what was really meant by this assault; that is to say, the refusal of
the coitus phantasy. Here the wish of the unconscious obtrudes itself
again, after the hero had repressed it the first time, and thereupon he
painfully and hysterically utters this monologue. “Temptation will often
assail her soul—but it will not yield.” This very bold assertion
reduces—noblesse oblige—the unconscious to an enormous infantile
megalomania, which is always the case when the libido is compelled,
through similar circumstances, to regressions. “Only once in all the ten
thousand moons is a soul born like mine!” Here the unconscious ego
expands to an enormous degree, evidently in order to cover with its
boastfulness a large part of the neglected duty of life. But punishment
follows at its heels. Whoever prides himself too much on having


sustained no wound in the battle of life lays himself open to the

suspicion that his fighting has been with words only, whilst actually he
has remained far away from the firing-line. This spirit is just the
reverse of the pride of those savage women, who point with satisfaction


to the countless scars which were given them by their men in the sexual

fight for supremacy. In accordance with this, and in logical
continuation of the same, all that follows is expressed in figurative
speech. The orgiastic “Occide moriturus” in its admixture with the


reckless laughter of the Dionysian frenzy confronts us here in sorry


disguise with a sentimental stage trickery worthy of our posthumous

edition of “Christian morals.” In place of the positive phallus, the
negative appears, and leads the hero’s horse (his libido animalis), not
to satisfaction, but into eternal peace—also the fate of the hero. This
end means that the mother, represented as the jaws of death, devours the
libido of the daughter. Therefore, instead of life and procreative
growth, only phantastic self-oblivion results. This weak and inglorious


end has no elevating or illuminating meaning so long as we consider it

merely as the solution of an individual erotic conflict. The fact that


the symbols under which the solution takes place have actually a

significant aspect, reveals to us that behind the individual mask,
behind the veil of “individuation,” a primitive idea stands, the severe


and serious features of which take from us the courage to consider the

sexual meaning of the Miller symbolism as all-sufficient.

It is not to be forgotten that the _sexual phantasies of the neurotic
and the exquisite sexual language of dreams_ are regressive phenomena.
The sexuality of the unconscious is not what it seems to be; _it is
merely a symbol_; it is a thought bright as day, clear as sunlight, a
decision, a step forward to every goal of life—but expressed in the
unreal sexual language of the unconscious, and in the thought form of an
earlier stage; a resurrection, so to speak, of earlier modes of
adaptation. When, therefore, the unconscious pushes into the foreground
the coitus wish, negatively expressed, it means somewhat as follows:


under similar circumstances primitive man acted in such and such a

manner. The mode of adaptation which to-day is unconscious for us is
carried on by the savage Negro of the present day, whose undertakings
beyond those of nutrition appertain to sexuality, characterized by
violence and cruelty. Therefore, in view of the archaic mode of
expression of the Miller phantasy, we are justified in assuming the
correctness of our interpretation for the lowest and nearest plane only.


A deeper stratum of meaning underlies the earlier assertion that the

figure of Chiwantopel has the character of Cassius, who has a lamb as a
companion. Therefore, Chiwantopel is the portion of the dreamer’s libido
bound up with the mother (and, therefore, masculine); hence he is her
infantile personality, the childishness of character, which as yet is
unable to understand that one must leave father and mother, when the
time is come, in order to serve the destiny of the entire personality.
This is outlined in Nietzsche’s words:

  “Free dost thou call thyself? Thy dominant thought would I hear and
  not that thou hast thrown off a yoke. Art thou one who had the right
  to throw off a yoke? There are many who throw away their last value
  when they throw away their servitude.”

Therefore, when Chiwantopel dies, it means that herein is a fulfilment
of a wish, that this infantile hero, who cannot leave the mother’s care,
may die. And if with that the bond between mother and daughter is
severed, a great step forward is gained both for inner and outer
freedom. But man wishes to remain a child too long; he would fain stop
the turning of the wheel, which, rolling, bears along with it the years;
man wishes to keep his childhood and eternal youth, rather than to die
and suffer corruption in the grave. (“O, do not suffer my body to fall
into decay and corruption.”) Nothing brings the relentless flight of


time and the cruel perishability of all blossoms more painfully to our

consciousness than an inactive and empty life. _Idle dreaming is the
mother of the fear of death_, the sentimental deploring of what has been
and the vain turning back of the clock. Although man can forget in the
long- (perhaps too long) guarded feelings of youth, in the dreamy state
of stubbornly held remembrances, that the wheel rolls onward,
nevertheless mercilessly does the gray hair, the relaxation of the skin
and the wrinkles in the face tell us, that whether or not we expose the
body to the destroying powers of the whole struggle of life, the poison
of the stealthily creeping serpent of time consumes our bodies, which,
alas! we so dearly love. Nor does it help if we cry out with the
melancholy hero Chiwantopel, “I have kept my body inviolate”; flight
from life does not free us from the law of age and death. The neurotic


who seeks to get rid of the necessities of life wins nothing and lays

upon himself the frightful burden of a premature age and death, which


must appear especially cruel on account of the total emptiness and

meaninglessness of his life. If the libido is not permitted to follow
the progressive life, which is willing to accept all dangers and all
losses, then it follows the other road, sinking into its own depths,


working down into the old foreboding regarding the immortality of all

life, to the longing for rebirth.

Hölderlin exemplifies this path in his poetry and his life. I leave the
poet to speak in his song:

                             _To the Rose._

                 “In the Mother-womb eternal,
                   Sweetest queen of every lea,


                 Still the living and supernal

                   Nature carries thee and me.

                 “Little rose, the storm’s fierce power
                   Strips our leaves and alters us;


                 Yet the deathless germ will tower

                   To new blooms, miraculous.”

The following comments may be made upon the parable of this poem: The
rose is the symbol of the beloved woman (“Haidenröslein,” heather rose
of Goethe). The rose blooms in the “rose-garden” of the maiden;
therefore, it is also a direct symbol of the libido. When the poet
dreams that he is with the rose in the mother-womb of nature, then,
psychologically, the fact is that his libido is with the mother. Here is
an eternal germination and renewal. We have come across this motive
already in the Hierosgamos hymn (Iliad XIV): The nuptials in the blessed
West; that is to say, the union in and with the mother. Plutarch shows
us this motive in naïve form in his tradition of the Osiris myth; Osiris
and Isis copulating in the mother’s womb. This is also perceived by
Hölderlin as the enviable prerogative of the gods—to enjoy everlasting
infancy. Thus, in Hyperion, he says:

                 “Fateless, like the sleeping nursling,
                 Breathe the Heavenly ones;
                 Chastely guarded in modest buds,
                 Their spirits blossom eternally,


                 And their quiet eyes


                 Gaze out in placid