animals with movable shells (Venus shell) or wings are utilized for very
transparent reasons as symbols of the female genitals.[525] The
Sphingina are the twilight moths; they, like the nightmare, come in the
darkness. Finally, it is to be observed that the sacred olive tree of
Athens is called “μορία” (that was derived from μόρος). Halirrhotios
wished to cut down the tree, but killed himself with the axe in the
attempt.

The sound resemblance of _mar_, _mère_ with _meer_ = sea and Latin
_mare_ = sea is remarkable, although etymologically accidental. Might it
refer back to “the great primitive idea of the mother” who, in the first
place, meant to us our individual world and afterwards became the symbol
of all worlds? Goethe said of the mothers: “They are encircled by images
of all creatures.” The Christians, too, could not refrain from reuniting
their mother of God with water. “Ave Maris stella” is the beginning of a
hymn to Mary. Then again it is the horses of Neptune which symbolize the
waves of the sea. It is probably of importance that the infantile word
ma-ma (mother’s breast) is repeated in its initial sound in all possible
languages, and that the mothers of two religious heroes are called Mary
and Maya. That the mother is the horse of the child is to be seen most


plainly in the primitive custom of carrying the child on the back or

letting it ride on the hip. Odin hung on the “world-ash,” the mother,
his “horse of terror.” The Egyptian sun-god sits on the back of his
mother, the heavenly cow.

We have already seen that, according to Egyptian conceptions, Isis, the
mother of god, played an evil trick on the sun-god with the poisonous
snake; also Isis behaved treacherously toward her son Horus in
Plutarch’s tradition. That is, Horus vanquished the evil Typhon, who
murdered Osiris treacherously (terrible mother = Typhon). Isis,
_however, set him free again_. Horus thereupon rebelled, _laid hands on
his mother and tore the regal ornaments from her head_, whereupon Hermes
gave her a cow’s head. Then Horus conquered Typhon a second time.
Typhon, in the Greek legend, is a monstrous dragon. Even without this


confirmation it is evident that the battle of Horus is the typical

battle of the sun-hero with the whale-dragon. Of the latter we know that
it is a symbol of the “dreadful mother,” of the voracious jaws of death,
where men are dismembered and ground up.[526] Whoever vanquishes this
monster has gained a new or eternal youth. For this purpose one must, in
spite of all dangers, descend into the belly of the monster[527]
(journey to hell) and spend some time there. (Imprisonment by night in
the sea.)

The battle with the night serpent signifies, therefore, the conquering
of the mother, who is suspected of an infamous crime, that is, the
betrayal of the son. A full confirmation of the connection comes to us
through the fragment of the Babylonian epic of the creation, discovered
by George Smith, mostly from the library of Asurbanipal. The period of
the origin of the text was probably in the time of Hammurabi (2,000
B.C.). We learn from this account of creation[528] that the sun-god Ea,
the son of the depths of the waters and the god of wisdom,[529] had
conquered Apsû. Apsû is the creator of the great gods (he existed in the
beginning in a sort of trinity with Tiâmat—the mother of gods and Mumu,
his vizier). Ea conquered the father, but Tiâmat plotted revenge. She
prepared herself for battle against the gods.

    “Mother Hubur, who created everything,
    Procured invincible weapons, gave birth to giant snakes
    With pointed teeth, relentless in every way;
    Filled their bellies with poison instead of blood,
    Furious gigantic lizards, clothed them with horrors,
    Let them swell with the splendor of horror, formed them rearing,
    Whoever sees them shall die of terror.
    Their bodies shall rear without turning to escape.
    She arrayed the lizards, dragons and Laḫamen,
    Hurricanes, mad dogs, scorpion men,
    Mighty storms, fishmen and rams.
    With relentless weapons, without fear of conflict,
    Powerful are Tiâmat’s commands, irresistible are they.

    “After Tiâmat had powerfully done her work
    She conceived evil against the gods, her descendants;
    In order to revenge Apsu, Tiâmat did evil.


    When Ea now heard this thing

    He became painfully anxious, sorrowfully he sat himself.
    He went to the father, his creator, Ans̆ar,
    To relate to him all that Tiâmat plotted.
    Tiâmat, our mother, has taken an aversion to us,
    Has prepared a riotous mob, furiously raging.”

The gods finally opposed Marduk, the god of spring, the victorious sun,
against the fearful host of Tiâmat. Marduk prepared for battle. Of his
chief weapon, which he created, it is said:

 “He created the evil wind, Imḫullu, the south storm and the hurricane,
 The fourth wind, the seventh wind, the whirlwind and the harmful wind,
 Then let he loose the winds, which he had created, the seven:
 To cause confusion within Tiâmat, they followed behind him,
 Then the lord took up the cyclone, his great weapon;
 For his chariot he mounted the stormwind, the incomparable, the terrible
    one.”

His chief weapon is the wind and a net, with which he will entangle
Tiâmat. He approaches Tiâmat and challenges her to a combat.

   “Then Tiâmat and Marduk, the wise one of the gods, came together,
   Rising for the fight, approaching to the battle:
   Then the lord spread out his net and caught her.
   He let loose the Imḫullu in his train at her face,
   Then Tiâmat now opened her mouth as wide as she could.
   He let the Imḫullu rush in so that her lips could not close;
   With the raging winds he filled her womb.
   Her inward parts were seized and she opened wide her mouth.
   He touched her with the spear, dismembered her body,
   He slashed her inward parts, and cut out her heart,
   Subdued her and put an end to her life.
   He threw down her body and stepped upon it.”

After Marduk slew the mother, he devised the creation of the world.

         “There the lord rested contemplating her body,
         Then divided he the Colossus, planning wisely.
         He cut it apart like a flat fish, into two parts,[530]
         One half he took and with it he covered the Heavens.”

In this manner Marduk created the universe from the mother. It is
clearly evident that the killing of the mother-dragon here takes place
under the idea of a wind fecundation with negative accompaniments.

The world is created from the mother, that is to say, from the libido
taken away from the mother through sacrifice. We shall have to consider
this significant formula more closely in the last chapter. The most


interesting parallels to this primitive myth are to be found in the

literature of the Old Testament, as Gunkel[531] has brilliantly pointed
out. It is worth while to trace the psychology of these parallels.

  _Isaiah_ li:9:

  (9) “Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake as in the
  ancient days, in the generation of old. Art thou not it that hath cut
  Rahab, and wounded the dragon?

  (10) “Art thou not it which hath dried the sea, the waters of the
  great deep, that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the
  ransomed to pass over?”

The name of Rahab is frequently used for Egypt in the Old Testament,
also dragon. _Isaiah_, chapter xxx, verse 7, calls Egypt “the silent
Rahab,” and means, therefore, something evil and hostile. Rahab is the
well-known whore of Jericho, who later, as the wife of Prince Salma,
became the ancestress of Christ. Here Rahab appeared as the old dragon,
as Tiâmat, against whose evil power Marduk, or Jehovah, marched forth.
The expression “the ransomed” refers to the Jews freed from bondage, but
it is also mythological, for the hero again frees those previously
devoured by the whale. (Frobenius.)

  _Psalm_, lxxxix:10:

  “Thou hast broken Rahab in pieces, as one that is slain.”

  _Job_ xxvi:12–13:

  “He divideth the sea with his power, and by his understanding he
  smiteth through the proud.

  “By his spirit he hath garnished the heavens, his hand hath formed the
  crooked serpent.”

Gunkel places Rahab as identical with Chaos, that is, the same as
Tiâmat. Gunkel translates “the breaking to pieces” as “violation.”
Tiâmat or Rahab as the mother is also the whore. Gilgamesh treats Ishtar
in this way when he accuses her of whoredom. This insult towards the
mother is very familiar to us from dream analysis. The dragon Rahab
appears also as Leviathan, the water monster (maternal sea).

  _Psalm_ lxxiv:

  (13) “Thou didst divide the sea by thy strength: thou brakest the
  heads of the dragons in the waters.

  (14) “Thou brakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces and gavest him to
  be meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness.

  (15) “Thou didst cleave the fountain and the flood: thou didst dry up
  mighty rivers.”


While only the phallic meaning of the Leviathan was emphasized in the

first part of this work, we now discover also the maternal meaning. A
further parallel is:

  _Isaiah_ xxvii:1:

  “In that day, the Lord with his cruel and great and strong sword shall
  punish Leviathan, the piercing serpent, even Leviathan that crooked
  serpent, and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea.”

We come upon a special motive in Job, chap. xli, v. 1:

  “Canst thou draw out Leviathan with an hook? or his tongue with a cord
  which thou lettest down? Canst thou put an hook in his nose? or bore
  his jaw through with a thorn?”


Numerous parallels to this motive are to be found among exotic myths in

Frobenius, where the maternal sea monster was also fished for. The


comparison of the mother libido with the elementary powers of the sea


and the powerful monsters borne by the earth show how invincibly great

is the power of that libido which we designate as maternal.


We have already seen that the incest prohibition prevents the son from

reproducing himself through the mother. But this must be done by the
god, as is shown with remarkable clearness and candor in the pious
Egyptian mythology, which has preserved the most ancient and simple
concepts. Thus Chnum, the “moulder,” the “potter,” the “architect,”
moulds his egg upon the potter’s wheel, for he is “the immortal growth,”
“the reproduction of himself and his own rebirth, the creator of the
egg, which emerged from the primitive waters.” In the Book of the Dead
it says:

  “I am the sublime falcon (the Sun-god), which has come forth from his
  egg.”

Another passage in the Book of the Dead reads:

  “I am the creator of Nun, who has taken his place in the underworld.
  My nest is not seen and my egg is not broken.”

A further passage reads:

  “that great and noble god in his egg: who is his own originator of
  that which has arisen from him.”[532]

Therefore, the god Nagaga-uer is also called the “great cackler.” (Book
of the Dead.) “I cackle like a goose and I whistle like a falcon.” The


mother is reproached with the incest prohibition as an act of wilful