inherent inertia. In this way the “word” had to execute and fulfil all
that was denied to the sexual wish; namely, the return into the mother,
in order to attain eternal duration. The “word” fulfils this wish by
itself becoming the daughter, the wife, the mother of the God, who
brings him forth anew.[699]

Wagner has this idea vaguely in his mind in Wotan’s lament over
Brunhilde:

                  “None as she knew my inmost thought;


                  None knew the source of my will

                  As she;


                  She herself was

                  The creating womb of my wish;


                  And so now she has broken

                  The blessed union!”

Brunhilde’s sin is the favoring of Siegmund, but, behind this, lies
incest: this is projected into the brother-sister relation of Siegmund
and Sieglinde; in reality, and archaically expressed, Wotan, the father,
has entered into his self-created daughter, in order to rejuvenate
himself. But this fact must, of course, be veiled. Wotan is rightly
indignant with Brunhilde, for she has taken the Isis rôle and through
the birth of the son has deprived the old man of his power. The first
attack of the death serpent in the form of the son, Siegmund, Wotan has
repelled; he has broken Siegmund’s sword, but Siegmund rises again in a
grandson. This inevitable fate is always helped by the woman; hence the
wrath of Wotan.

At Siegfried’s birth Sieglinde dies, as is proper. The
foster-mother[700] is apparently not a woman, but a chthonic god, a
crippled dwarf, who belongs to that tribe which renounces love.[701] The
Egyptian god of the underworld, the crippled shadow of Osiris (who
celebrated a melancholy resurrection in the sexless semi-ape
Harpocrates), is the tutor of Horus, who has to avenge the death of his
father.

Meanwhile Brunhilde sleeps the enchanted sleep, like a Hierosgamos, upon
a mountain, where Wotan has put her to sleep[702] with the magic thorn
(Edda), surrounded by the flames of Wotan’s fire (equal to libido[703]),
which wards off every one. But Mime becomes Siegfried’s enemy and wills
his death through Fafner. Here Mime’s dynamic nature is revealed; he is
a masculine representation of the terrible mother, also a foster-mother
of demoniac nature, who places the poisonous worm (Typhon) in her son’s
(Horus’s) path. Siegfried’s longing for the mother drives him away from
Mime, and his travels begin with the mother of death, and lead through
vanquishing the “terrible mother”[704] to the woman:

               _Siegfried_:

                 Off with the imp!
                 I ne’er would see him more!


                 Might I but know what my mother was like

                 That will my thought never tell me!
                 Her eyes’ tender light


                 Surely did shine

                 Like the soft eyes of the doe!


Siegfried decides to separate from the demon which was the mother in the

past, and he gropes forward with the longing directed towards the
mother. Nature acquires a hidden maternal significance for him (“doe”);


in the tones of nature he discovers a suggestion of the maternal voice

and the maternal language:

                _Siegfried_:

                Thou gracious birdling,
                Strange art thou to me!
                Dost thou in the wood here dwell?
                Ah, would that I could take thy meaning!
                Thy song something would say—
                Perchance—of my loving mother!

This psychology we have already encountered in Hiawatha. By means of his
dialogue with the bird (bird, like wind and arrow, represents the wish,
the winged longing) Siegfried entices Fafner from the cave. His desires
turn back to the mother, and the chthonic demon, the cave-dwelling
terror of the woods, appears. Fafner is the protector of the treasure;
in his cave lies the hoard, the source of life and power. The mother
possesses the libido of the son, and jealously does she guard it.
Translated into psychological language, this means the positive


transference succeeds only through the release of the libido from the

mother-imago, the incestuous object in general. Only in this manner is
it possible to gain one’s libido, the incomparable treasure, and this
requires a mighty struggle, the whole battle of adaptation.[705] The


Siegfried legend has abundantly described the outcome of this battle

with Fafner. According to the Edda, Siegfried eats Fafner’s heart, the
seat of life. He wins the magic cap, through whose power Alberich had
changed himself into a serpent. This refers to the motive of casting the
skin, rejuvenation. By means of the magic cap one can vanish and assume
different shapes. The vanishing probably refers to dying and to the
invisible presence; that is, existence in the mother’s womb. A
luck-bringing cap, amniotic covering, the new-born child occasionally
wears over his head (the caul). Moreover, Siegfried drinks the dragon’s
blood, which makes it possible for him to understand the language of
birds, and consequently he enters into a peculiar relation with Nature,
a dominating position, the result of his knowledge, and finally wins the
treasure.

_Hort_ is a mediæval and Old High German word with the meaning of
“collected and guarded treasure”; Gothic, _huzd_; Old Scandinavian,
_hodd_; Germanic _hozda_, from pre-Germanic _kuzdhó_—for _kudtho_—“the
concealed.” Kluge[706] adds to this the Greek κεύθω, έκυθον = “to hide,
to conceal.” Also _hut_ (_hut_, to guard; English, hide), Germanic root
_hud_, from Indo-Germanic _kuth_ (questionable), to Greek κεύθω and
κύσθος, “cavity,” feminine genitals. Prellwitz,[707] too, traces Gothic
_huzd_, Anglo-Saxon _hyde_, English hide and hoard, to Greek κεύθω.
Whitley Stokes traces English hide, Anglo-Saxon _hydan_, New High German
_Hütte_, Latin _cûdo_ = helmet; Sanskrit _kuhara_ (cave?) to primitive
Celtic _koudo_ = concealment; Latin, _occultatio_.

The assumption of Kluge is also supported in other directions; namely,
from the point of view of the primitive idea:

  “There exists in Athens[708] a sacred place (a Temenos) of Ge, with
  the surname Olympia. Here the ground is torn open for about a yard in
  width; and they say, after the flood at the time of Deucalion, that
  the water receded here; and every year they throw into the fissure
  wheatmeal, kneaded with honey.”

We have observed previously that among the Arrhetophorian, pastry in the
form of snakes and phalli, was thrown into a crevice in the earth. This


was mentioned in connection with the ceremonies of fertilizing the

earth. We have touched slightly already upon the sacrifice in the earth
crevice among the Watschandies. The flood of death has passed
characteristically into the crevice of the earth; that is, back into the
mother again; because from the mother the universal great death has come
in the first place. The flood is simply the counterpart of the vivifying
and all-producing water: Ὠκεανοῦ, ὅσπερ γένεσις πάντεσσι τέτυκται.[709]
One sacrifices the honey cake to the mother, so that she may spare one
from death. Thus every year in Rome a gold sacrifice was thrown into the
lacus Curtius, into the former fissure in the earth, which could only be
closed through the sacrificial death of Curtius. He was the typical
hero, who has journeyed into the underworld, in order to conquer the
danger threatening the Roman state from the opening of the abyss.
(Kaineus, Amphiaraos.) In the Amphiaraion of Oropos those healed through
the temple incubation threw their gifts of gold into the sacred well, of
which Pausanias says:

  “If any one is healed of a sickness through a saying of the oracle,
  then it is customary to throw a silver or gold coin into the well;
  because here Amphiaraos has ascended as a god.”


It is probable that this oropic well is also the place of his

“Katabasis” (descent into the lower world). There were many entrances
into Hades in antiquity. Thus near Eleusis there was an abyss, through
which Aidoneus passed up and down, when he kidnapped Cora. (Dragon and
maiden: the libido overcome by resistance, life replaced by death.)
There were crevices in the rocks, through which souls could ascend to
the upper world. Behind the temple of Chthonia in Hermione lay a sacred
district of Pluto, with a ravine through which Hercules had brought up
Cerberus; in addition, there was an “Acherusian” lake.[710] This ravine
was, therefore, the entrance to the place where death was conquered. The
lake also belongs here as a further mother symbol, for symbols appear
massed together, as they are surrogates, and, therefore, do not afford
the same satisfaction of desire as accorded by reality, so that the


unsatisfied remnant of the libido must seek still further symbolic

outlets. The ravine in the Areopagus in Athens was considered the seat
of inhabitants of the lower world. An old Grecian custom[711] suggests a
similar idea. Girls were sent into a cavern, where a poisonous snake
dwelt, as a test of virginity. If they were bitten by the snake, it was
a token that they were no longer chaste. We find this same motive again
in the Roman legend of St. Silvester, at the end of the fifth
century:[712]

  “Erat draco immanissimus in monte Tarpeio, in quo est Capitolium
  collocatum. Ad hunc draconem per CCCLXV gradus, quasi ad infernum,


  magi cum virginibus sacrilegis descendebant semel in mense cum

  sacrificiis et lustris, ex quibus esca poterat tanto draconi inferri.


  Hic draco subito ex improviso ascendebat et licet non ingrederetur

  vicinos tamen aeres flatu suo vitiabat. Ex quo mortalitas hominum et
  maxima luctus de morte veniebat infantum. (Lilith motive.) Sanctus


  itaque Silvester cum haberet cum paganis pro defensione veritatis

  conflictum, ad hoc venit ut dicerent ei pagani: ‘Silvester descende ad


  draconem et fac eum in nomine Dei tui vel uno anno ab interfectione