essential biologically and practically for the fulfilment of the ego of

the individual, but before which an obstacle arises from which he
shrinks, and thus halted cannot go on. With this interference in the
path of progression libido is stored up and a _regression_ takes place


whereby there occurs a reanimation of past ways of libido occupation

which were entirely normal to the child, but which for the adult are no
longer of value. These regressive infantile desires and phantasies now
alive and striving for satisfaction are converted into symptoms, and in
these surrogate forms obtain a certain gratification, thus creating the
external manifestations of the neurosis. Therefore Jung does not ask


from what psychic experience or point of fixation in childhood the

patient is suffering, but what is the present duty or task he is
avoiding, or what obstacle in his life’s path he is unable to overcome?
What is the cause of his regression to past psychic experiences?


Following this theory Jung expresses the view that the elaborate


phantasies and dreams produced by these patients are really forms of


compensation or artificial substitutes for the unfulfilled adaptation to

reality. The sexual content of these phantasies and dreams is only


apparently and not actually expressive of a real sexual desire or incest

wish, but is a regressive employment of sexual forms to symbolically
express a present-day need when the attainment of the present ego demand
seems too difficult or impossible, and no adaptation is made to what is
possible for the individual’s capability.[3]


With this statement Jung throws a new light on the work of analytic

psychology and on the conception of the neurotic symptoms, and renders


possible of understanding the many apparent incongruities and

conflicting observations which have been so disturbing to the critics.


It now becomes proper to ask what has been established by all this mass

of investigation into the soul, and what is its value not only as a
therapeutic measure for the neurotic sufferer, but also for the normal
human being?


First and perhaps most important is the recognition of a definite

psychological determinism. Instead of human life being filled with
foolish, meaningless or purposeless actions, errors and thoughts, it can
be demonstrated that no expression or manifestation of the psyche,
however trifling or inconsistent in appearance, is really lawless or
unmotivated. Only a possession of the technique is necessary in order to
reveal, to any one desirous of knowing, the existence of the unconscious
determinants of his mannerisms, trivial expressions, acts and behavior,
their purpose and significance.

This leads into the second fundamental conception, which is perhaps even
less considered than the foregoing, and that is the relative value of
the conscious mind and thought. It is the general attitude of people to
judge themselves by their surface motives, to satisfy themselves by
saying or thinking “this is what I want to do or say” or “I intended to
do thus and so,” but somehow what one thought, one intended to say or


expected to do is very often the contrary of what actually is said or

done. Every one has had these experiences when the gap between the
conscious thought and action was gross enough to be observed. It is also


a well known experience to consciously desire something very much and


when it is obtained to discover that this in no wise satisfied or

lessened the desire, which was then transferred to some other object.


Thus one became cognizant of the fact that the feeling and idea

presented by consciousness as the desire was an error. What is the
difficulty in these conditions? Evidently some other directing force
than that of which we are aware is at work.

Dr. G. Stanley Hall uses a very striking symbol when he compares the
mind to an iceberg floating in the ocean with one-eighth visible above
the water and seven-eighths below—the one-eighth above being that part
called conscious and the seven-eighths below that which we call the
unconscious. The influence and controlling power of the unconscious
desires over our thoughts and acts are in this relative proportion.


Faint glimmers of other motives and interests than those we accept or

which we believe, often flit into consciousness. These indications, if
studied or valued accurately, would lead to the realization that


consciousness is but a single stage and but one form of expression of

mind. Therefore its dictum is but one, often untrustworthy, approach to
the great question as to what is man’s actual psychic accomplishment,


and as to what in particular is the actual soul development of the

individual.


A further contribution of equal importance has been the empiric

development of a dynamic theory of life; the conception that life is in
a state of flux—movement—leading either to construction or destruction.


Through the development man has reached he has attained the power by


means of his intelligence and understanding of definitely directing to a


certain extent this life energy or libido into avenues which serve his

interest and bring a real satisfaction for the present day.


When man through ignorance and certain inherent tendencies fails to

recognize his needs or his power to fulfil them, or to adapt himself to
the conditions of reality of the present time, there is then produced


that reanimation of infantile paths by which an attempt is made to gain


fulfilment or satisfaction through the production of symptoms or

attitudes.


The acceptance of these statements demands the recognition of the


existence of an infantile sexuality and the large part played by it in

the later life of the individual. Because of the power and imperious
influence exerted by the parents upon the child, and because of the
unconscious attachment of his libido to the original object, the mother,
and the perseverance of this first love model in the psyche, he finds it
very difficult, on reaching the stage of adult development and the time
for seeking a love object outside of the family, to gain a satisfactory
model.


It is exceedingly important for parents and teachers to recognize the

requirements of nature, which, beginning with puberty, imperiously


demand of the young individual a separation of himself from the parent

stem and the development of an independent existence. In our complex


modern civilization this demand of nature is difficult enough of


achievement for the child who has the heartiest and most intelligent

co-operation of his parents and environment—but for the one who has not


only to contend with his own inner struggle for his freedom but has in


addition the resistance of his parents who would hold him in his

childhood at any cost, because they cannot endure the thought of his
separation from them, the task becomes one of the greatest magnitude. It


is during this period when the struggle between the childish inertia and

nature’s urge becomes so keen, that there occur the striking
manifestations of jealousy, criticism, irritability all usually directed
against the parents, of defiance of parental authority, of runaways and
various other psychic and nervous disorders known to all.

This struggle, which is the first great task of mankind and the one
which requires the greatest effort, is that which is expressed by Jung
as the self-sacrifice motive—the sacrifice of the childish feelings and
demands, and of the irresponsibility of this period, and the assumption
of the duties and tasks of an individual existence.


It is this great theme which Jung sees as the real motive lying hidden

in the myths and religions of man from the beginning, as well as in the
literature and artistic creations of both ancient and modern time, and


which he works out with the greatest wealth of detail and painstaking

effort in the book herewith presented.


This necessitates a recognition and revaluation of the enormous


importance and influence of the ego and the sexual instinct upon the

thought and reaction of man, and also predicates a displacement of the


psychological point of gravity from the will and intellect to the realm

of the emotions and feelings. The desired end is a synthesis of these


two paths or the use of the intellect constructively in the service of


the emotions in order to gain for the best interest of the individual

some sort of co-operative reaction between the two.


No one dealing with analytic psychology can fail to be struck by the

tremendous and unnecessary burdens which man has placed upon himself,


and how greatly he has increased the difficulties of adaptation by his

rigid intellectual views and moral formulas, and by his inability to
admit to himself that he is actually just a human being imperfect, and
containing within himself all manner of tendencies, good and bad, all
striving for some satisfactory goal. Further, that the refusal to see


himself in this light instead of as an ideal person in no way alters the

actual condition, and that in fact, through the cheap pretense of being
able only to consider himself as a very virtuous person, or as shocked
and hurt when observing the “sins” of others, he actually is prevented


from developing his own character and bringing his own capacities to

their fullest expressions.


There is frequently expressed among people the idea of how fortunate it

is that we cannot see each other’s thoughts, and how disturbing it would
be if our real feelings could be read. But what is so shameful in these
secrets of the soul? They are in reality our own egoistic desires all
striving, longing, wishing for satisfaction, for happiness; those


desires which instinctively crave their own gratification but which can


only be really fulfilled by adapting them to the real world and to the

social group.


Why is it that it is so painful for man to admit that the prime

influence in all human endeavor is found in the ego itself, in its
desires, wishes, needs and satisfactions, in short, in its need for
self-expression and self-perpetuation, the evolutionary impetus in life?


The basis for the unpleasantness of this idea may perhaps be found in an


inner resistance in nature itself which forces man to include others in

his scheme, lest his own greedy desires should serve to destroy him. But


even with this inner demand and all the ethical and moral teachings of


centuries it is everywhere evident that man has only very imperfectly


learned that it is to his own interest to consider his neighbor and that


it is impossible for him to ignore the needs of the body social of which

he is a part. Externally, the recognition of the strength of the ego


impulse is objectionable because of the ideal conception that

self-striving and so-called selfish seeking are unworthy, ignoble and
incompatible with a desirable character and must be ignored at all cost.


The futility of this attitude is to be clearly seen in the failure after

all these centuries to even approximate it, as evidenced in our human
relations and institutions, and is quite as ineffectual in this realm as


in that of sexuality where the effort to overcome this imperious

domination has been attempted by lowering the instinct, and seeing in it
something vile or unclean, something unspeakable and unholy. Instead of


destroying the power of sexuality this struggle has only warped and

distorted, injured and mutilated the expression; for not without


destruction of the individual can these fundamental instincts be

destroyed. Life itself has needs and imperiously demands expression
through the forms created. All nature answers to this freely and simply
except man. His failure to recognize himself as an instrument through


which the life energy is coursing and the demands of which must be

obeyed, is the cause of his misery. Despite his possession of intellect
and self-consciousness, he cannot without disaster to himself refuse the
tasks of life and the fulfilment of his own needs. Man’s great task is


the adaptation of himself to reality and the recognition of himself as


an instrument for the expression of life according to his individual

possibilities.

It is in his privilege as a self-creator that his highest purpose is
found.

The value of self-consciousness lies in the fact that man is enabled to


reflect upon himself and learn to understand the true origin and

significance of his actions and opinions, that he may adequately value
the real level of his development and avoid being self-deceived and
therefore inhibited from finding his biological adaptation. He need no


longer be unconscious of the motives underlying his actions or hide

himself behind a changed exterior, in other words, be merely a series of
reactions to stimuli as the mechanists have it, but he may to a certain
extent become a self-creating and self-determining being.

Indeed, there seems to be an impulse towards adaptation quite as Bergson
sees it, and it would seem to be a task of the highest order to use
intelligence to assist one’s self to work with this impulse.


Through the investigation of these different avenues leading into the


hidden depths of the human being and through the revelation of the

motives and influences at work there, although astonishing to the
uninitiated, a very clear and definite conception of the actual human
relationship—brotherhood—of all mankind is obtained. It is this


recognition of these common factors basically inherent in humanity from

the beginning and still active, which is at once both the most hopeful
and the most feared and disliked part of psychoanalysis.


It is disliked by those individuals who have prided themselves upon


their superiority and the distinction between their reactions and

motives and those of ordinary mankind. In other words, they attempt to
become personalities through elevating themselves and lowering others,


and it is a distinct blow to discover that beneath these pretensions lie

the very ordinary elements shared in common by all. On the other hand,


to those who have been able to recognize their own weaknesses and have

suffered in the privacy of their own souls, the knowledge that these
things have not set them apart from others, but that they are the common


property of all and that no one can point the finger of scorn at his

fellow, is one of the greatest experiences of life and is productive of
the greatest relief.


It is feared by many who realize that in these painfully acquired


repressions and symptoms lie their safety and their protection from


directly facing and dealing with tendencies and characteristics with