              To build an image and see the Spirit—
              See it as it was!”

He allows only one hope to glimmer through, formed in scanty words:

              “He wakes the dead;
              They who are not enchained and bound,
              They who are not unwrought.
              ... And if the Heavenly Ones
              Now, as I believe, love me—
              ... Silent is his sign[802]
              In the dusky sky. And one stands under it
              His whole life long—for Christ still lives.”

But, as once Gilgamesh, bringing back the magic herb from the west land,
was robbed of his treasure by the demon serpent, so does Hölderlin’s
poem die away in a painful lament, which betrays to us that no
victorious resurrection will follow his descent to the shadows:

               “... Ignominiously
               A power tears our heart away,
               For sacrifices the heavenly ones demand.”

This recognition, that man must sacrifice the retrogressive longing (the
incestuous libido) before the “heavenly ones” tear away the sacrifice,
and at the same time the entire libido, came too late to the poet.
Therefore, I take it to be a wise counsel which the unconscious gives
our author, to sacrifice the infantile hero. This sacrifice is best
accomplished, as is shown by the most obvious meaning, through a
complete devotion to life, in which all the libido unconsciously bound
up in familial bonds, must be brought outside into human contact. For it
is necessary for the well-being of the adult individual, who in his
childhood was merely an atom revolving in a rotary system, to become
himself the centre of a new system. That such a step implies the
solution or, at least, the energetic treatment of the individual sexual
problem is obvious, for unless this is done the unemployed libido will
inexorably remain fixed in the incestuous bond, and will prevent
individual freedom in essential matters. Let us keep in mind that
Christ’s teaching separates man from his family without consideration,


and in the talk with Nicodemus we saw the specific endeavor of Christ to

procure activation of the incest libido. Both tendencies serve the same
goal—the liberation of man; the Jew from his extraordinary fixation to
the family, which does not imply higher development, but greater
weakness and more uncontrolled incestuous feeling, produced the


compensation of the compulsory ceremonial of the cult and the religious

fear of the incomprehensible Jehovah. When man, terrified by no laws and
no furious fanatics or prophets, allows his incestuous libido full play,
and does not liberate it for higher purposes, then he is under the
influence of unconscious compulsion. For compulsion is the unconscious
wish. (Freud.) He is under the dominance of the libido εἱμαρμένη[803]
and his destiny does not lie in his own hands; his adventures, Τύχαι καὶ
Μοῖραι,[804] fall from the stars. His unconscious incestuous libido,
which thus is applied in its most primitive form, fixes the man, as
regards his love type, in a corresponding primitive stage, the stage of
ungovernableness and surrender to the emotions. Such was the psychologic
situation of the passing antiquity, and the Redeemer and Physician of


that time was he who endeavored to educate man to the sublimation of the

incestuous libido.[805] The destruction of slavery was the necessary
condition of that sublimation, for antiquity had not yet recognized the
duty of work and work as a duty, as a social need of fundamental
importance. Slave labor was compulsory work, the counterpart of the
equally disastrous compulsion of the libido of the privileged. It was


only the obligation of the individual to work which made possible in the

long run that regular “drainage” of the unconscious, which was inundated
by the continual regression of the libido. Indolence is the beginning of
all vice, because in a condition of slothful dreaming the libido has
abundant opportunity for sinking into itself, in order to create


compulsory obligations by means of regressively reanimated incestuous

bonds. The best liberation is through _regular work_.[806] Work,
however, is salvation only when it is a free act, and has in itself
nothing of infantile compulsion. In this respect, religious ceremony
appears in a high degree as organized inactivity, and at the same time
as the forerunner of modern work.

Miss Miller’s vision treats the problem of the sacrifice of the
infantile longing, in the first place, as an individual problem, but if
we cast a glance at the form of this presentation, then we will become
aware that here it must concern something, which is also a problem of
humanity in general. For the symbols employed, the serpent which killed
the horse[807] and the hero voluntarily sacrificing himself, are


primitive figures of phantasies and religious myths streaming up from

the unconscious.

In so far as the world and all within it is, above all, a thought, which
is credited with transcendental “substance” through the empirical need
of the same, there results from the sacrifice of the regressive libido
the creation of the world; and, psychologically speaking, the world in
general. For him who looks backward the world, and even the infinite
starry sky, is the mother[808] who bends over and encloses him on all
sides, and from the renunciation of this idea and from the longing for
this idea arises the image of the world. From this most simple
fundamental thought, which perhaps appears strange to us only because it
is conceived according to the _principle of desire and not the principle
of reality_,[809] results the significance of the cosmic sacrifice. A


good example of this is the slaying of the Babylonian primitive mother

Tiâmat, the dragon, whose body is destined to form the heaven and the
earth. We come upon this thought in its most complete form in Hindoo
philosophy of the most ancient date; namely, in songs of Rigveda. In
Rigveda 10: 81, 4, the song inquires:

 “What was the tree, what wood in sooth produced it, from which they
    fashioned out the earth and heaven?
 Ye thoughtful men inquire within your spirit, whereon he stood when he
    established all things.”

Viçvakarman, the All-Creator, who created the world from the unknown
tree, did so as follows:

          “He who, sacrificing, entered into all these beings
          As a wise sacrificer, our Father, who,
          Striving for blessings through prayer,
          Hiding his origin,
          Entered this lowly world,


          What and who has served him

          As a resting-place and a support?”[810]

Rigveda 10: 90, gives answer to these questions. Purusha is the primal


being who

                  “... covered earth on every side and
                  Spread ten fingers’ breadth beyond.”

One sees that Purusha is a sort of Platonic world soul, who surrounds
the world from without. Of Purusha it is said:

                  “Being born he overtopped the earth
                  Before, behind, and in all places.”

The mother symbolism is plain, it seems to me, in the idea of Purusha.
He represents the mother-imago and the libido of the child clinging to
her. From this assumption all that follows is very easily explained:

               “As sacrificial animal on the bed of straw
               Was dedicated the Purusha,
               Who was born on the straw,
               Whom the Gods, the Blest, and the Wise,
               Meeting there, sacrificed.”

This verse is very remarkable; if one wishes to stretch this mythology
out on the procrustean bed of logic, sore violence would have to be
committed. It is an incredibly phantastic conception that, beside the
gods, ordinary “wise men” unite in sacrificing the primitive being,
aside from the circumstance that, beside the primitive being, nothing
had existed in the beginning (that is to say, before the sacrifice), as
we shall soon see. If the great mystery of the mother sacrifice is meant
thereby, then all becomes clear:

               “From that great general sacrifice
               The dripping fat was gathered up.
               He formed the creatures of the air,
               And animals both wild and tame.


               From that great general sacrifice

               Richas and Sama-hymns were born;
               Therefrom the metres were produced,
               The Yajus had its birth from it.

               “The moon was gendered from his mind
               And from his eye the Sun had birth;


               Indra and Agni from his mouth

               Were born, and Vâyu from his breath.

               “Forth from his navel came midair;
               The sky was fashioned from his head;
               Earth from his feet, and from his ears
               The regions. Thus they formed the worlds.”

It is evident that by this is meant not a physical, but a psychological
cosmogony. The world arises when man discovers it. He discovers it when
he sacrifices the mother; that is to say, when he has freed himself from
the midst of his unconscious lying in the mother. That which impels him


forward to this discovery may be interpreted psychologically as the

so-called “Incest barrier” of Freud. The incest prohibition places an
end to the childish longing for the food-giving mother, and compels the
libido, gradually becoming sexual, into the path of the biological aim.


The libido forced away from the mother by the incest prohibition seeks

for the sexual object in the place of the forbidden mother. In this
wider psychologic sense, which expresses itself in the allegoric
language of the “incest prohibition,” “mother,” etc., must be understood
Freud’s paradoxical sentence, “Originally we have known only sexual
objects.”[811] This sentence must be understood psychologically
throughout, in the sense of a world image created from within outwards,
which has, in the first place, nothing to do with the so-called
“objective” idea of the world. This is to be understood as a new edition
of the subjective idea of the world corrected by reality. Biology, as a
science of objective experience, would have to reject unconditionally
Freud’s proposition, for, as we have made clear above, the function of
reality can only be partly sexual; in another equally important part it
is self-preservation. The matter appears different for that thought
which accompanies the biological function as an epiphenomenon. As far as
our knowledge reaches, the individual act of thought is dependent wholly
or in greatest part on the existence of a highly differentiated brain,
whereas the function of reality (adaptation to reality) is something


which occurs in all living nature as wholly independent from the act of

thought. This important proposition of Freud’s applies only to the act
of thought, for thinking, as we may recognize from manifold traces,
arose dynamically from the libido, which was split off from the original
object at the “incest barrier” and became actual when the first budding


sexual emotions began to flow in the current of the libido which goes to

the mother. Through the incest barrier the sexual libido is forced away
from the identification with the parents, and introverted for lack of
adequate activity. It is the sexual libido which forces the growing
individual slowly away from his family. If this necessity did not exist,
then the family would always remain clustered together in a solid group.
Hence the neurotic always renounces a complete erotic experience,[812]
in order that he may remain a child. Phantasies seem to arise from the
introversion of the sexual libido. Since the first childish phantasies
most certainly do not attain the quality of a conscious plan, and as
phantasies likewise (even among adults) are almost always the direct
derivates of the unconscious, it is, therefore, highly probable that the
first phantastic manifestations arise from an act of regression. As we
illustrated earlier, the regression goes back to the presexual stage, as
many traces show. Here the sexual libido obtains again, so to speak,
that universal capacity of application, or capacity for displacement,


which it actually possessed at that stage when the sexual application

was not yet discovered. Naturally, no adequate object is found in the
presexual stage for the regressive sexual libido, but only surrogates,
which always leave a wish; namely, the wish to have the surrogate as
similar as possible to the sexual goal. This wish is secret, however,
for it is really an incest wish. The unsatisfied unconscious wish
creates innumerable secondary objects, symbols for the primitive object,
the mother (as the Rigveda says, the creator of the world, “hiding his
origin,” enters into things). From this the thought or the phantasies
proceed, as a desexualized manifestation of _an originally sexual
libido_.

From the standpoint of the libido, the term “incest barrier” corresponds
to one aspect, but the matter, however, may be considered from another
point of view.

The time of undeveloped sexuality, about the third and the fourth year,
is, at the same time, considered externally, the period when the child


finds himself confronted with increased demands from the world of