              Once more a mighty choral took:
              All glory to the God of Light!

              “When the Eternal first gave Love
              A myriad hearts sprang into life;
              Ears filled with music, eyes with light;
              Pealed forth with hearts with love all rife:
              All glory to the God of Love!”

Before we enter upon Miss Miller’s attempt to bring to light through her
suppositions[64] the root of this subliminal creation, we will attempt a
short analytic survey of the material already in our possession. The
impression on the ship has already been properly emphasized, so that we


need have no further difficulty in gaining possession of the dynamic

process which brought about this poetical revelation. It was made clear


in the preceding paragraphs that Miss Miller possibly had not

inconsiderably undervalued the importance of the erotic impression. This
assumption gains in probability through experience, which shows that,
very generally, relatively weak erotic impressions are greatly
undervalued. One can see this best in cases where those concerned,
either from social or moral grounds, consider an erotic relation as
something quite impossible; for example, parents and children, brothers
and sisters, relations (homosexual) between older and younger men, and
so on. If the impression is relatively slight, then it does not exist at
all for the participators; if the impression is strong, then a tragic
dependence arises, which may result in some great nonsense, or be
carried to any extent. This lack of understanding can go unbelievably
far; mothers, who see the first erections of the small son in their own
bed, a sister who half-playfully embraces her brother, a twenty-year-old
daughter who still seats herself on her father’s lap, and then has
“strange” sensations in her “abdomen.” They are all morally indignant to
the highest degree if one speaks of “sexuality.” Finally, our whole


education is carried on with the tacit agreement to know as little as

possible of the erotic, and to spread abroad the deepest ignorance in
regard to it. It is no wonder, therefore, that the judgment, _in
puncto_, of the importance of an erotic impression is generally unsafe
and inadequate.

Miss Miller was under the influence of a deep erotic impression, as we
have seen. Because of the sum-total of the feelings aroused by this, it
does not seem that this impression was more than dimly realized, for the
dream had to contain a powerful repetition. From analytic experience,


one knows that the early dreams which patients bring for analysis are

none the less of especial interest, because of the fact that they bring
out criticisms and valuations of the physician’s personality, which
previously, would have been asked for directly in vain. They enrich the
conscious impression which the patient had of his physician, and often
concerning very important points. They are naturally erotic observations
which the unconscious was forced to make, just because of the quite


universal undervaluation and uncertain judgment of the relatively weak

erotic impression. In the drastic and hyperbolic manner of expression of
the dream, the impression often appears in almost unintelligible form on
account of the immeasurable dimension of the symbol. A further


peculiarity which seems to rest upon the historic strata of the

unconscious, is this—that an erotic impression, to which conscious
acknowledgment is denied, usurps an earlier and discarded transference
and expresses itself in that. Therefore, it frequently happens, for
example, that among young girls at the time of their first love,
remarkable difficulties develop in the capacity for erotic expression,


which may be reduced analytically to disturbances through a regressive

attempt at resuscitation of the father image, or the “Father-Imago.”[65]

Indeed, one might presume something similar in Miss Miller’s case, for
the idea of the masculine creative deity is a derivation, analytically
and historically psychologic, of the “Father-Imago,”[66] and aims, above
all, to replace the discarded infantile father transference in such a


way that for the individual the passing from the narrow circle of the


family into the wider circle of human society may be simpler or made

easier.

In the light of this reflection, we can see, in the poem and its
“Praeludium,” the religious, poetically formed product of an
introversion depending upon the surrogate of the “Father-Imago.” In
spite of the incomplete apperception of the effectual impression,


essential component parts of this are included in the idea of

compensation, as marks, so to speak, of its origin. (Pfister has coined
for this the striking expression, “Law of the Return of the Complex.”)


The effectual impression was that of the officer singing in the night

watch, “When the morning stars sang together.” The idea of this opened a
new world to the girl. (Creation.)

This creator has created tone, then light, and then love. That the first
to be created should have been tone, can be made clear only
individually, for there is no cosmogony except the Gnosis of Hermes, a
generally quite unknown system, which would have such tendencies. But
now we might venture a conjecture, which is already apparent, and which
soon will be proven thoroughly, viz., the following chain of
associations: the singer—the singing morning stars—the God of tone—the
Creator—the God of Light—(of the sun)—(of the fire)—and of Love.

The links of this chain are proven by the material, with the exception
of sun and fire, which I put in parentheses, but which, however, will be
proven through what follows in the further course of the analysis. All
of these expressions, with one exception, belong to erotic speech. (“My
God, star, light; my sun, fire of love, fiery love,” etc.) “Creator”
appears indistinct at first, but becomes understandable through the
reference to the undertone of Eros, to the vibrating chord of Nature,
which attempts to renew itself in every pair of lovers, and awaits the
wonder of creation.


Miss Miller had taken pains to disclose the unconscious creation of her

mind to her understanding, and, indeed through a procedure which agrees
in principle with psychoanalysis, and, therefore, leads to the same
results as psychoanalysis. But, as usually happens with laymen and
beginners, Miss Miller, because she had no knowledge of psychoanalysis,


left off at the thoughts which necessarily bring the deep complex lying

at the bottom of it to light in an indirect, that is to say, censored
manner. More than this, a simple method, merely the carrying out of the
thought to its conclusion, is sufficient to discover the meaning. Miss
Miller finds it astonishing that her unconscious phantasy does not,
following the Mosaic account of creation, put light in the first place,
instead of tone.

Now follows an explanation, theoretically constructed and correct ad
hoc, the hollowness of which is, however, characteristic of all similar
attempts at explanation. She says:

  “It is perhaps interesting to recall that Anaxagoras also had the
  Cosmos arise out of chaos through a sort of whirlwind, which does not
  happen usually without producing sound.[67] But at this time I had
  studied no philosophy, and knew nothing either of Anaxagoras or of his
  theories about the ‘νοῦς,’ which I, unconsciously, was openly
  following. At that time, also, I was equally in complete ignorance of
  Leibnitz, and, therefore, knew nothing of his doctrine ‘dum Deus
  calculat, fit mundus.’”

Miss Miller’s references to Anaxagoras and to Leibnitz both refer to
creation by means of thought; that is to say, that divine thought alone
could bring forth a new material reality, a reference at first not
intelligible, but which will soon, however, be more easily understood.


We now come to those fancies from which Miss Miller principally drew her

unconscious creation.

  “In the first place, there is the ‘Paradise Lost’ by Milton, which we
  had at home in the edition illustrated by Doré, and which had often
  delighted me from childhood. Then the ‘Book of Job,’ which had been
  read aloud to me since the time of my earliest recollection. Moreover,
  if one compares the first words of ‘Paradise Lost’ with my first
  verse, one notices that there is the same verse measure.

                    “‘Of man’s first disobedience ...

                  “‘When the Eternal first made sound.’

  “My poem also recalls various passages in Job, and one or two places
  in Handel’s Oratorio ‘The Creation,’ which came out very indistinctly
  in the first part of the dream.”[68]

The “Lost Paradise” which, as is well known, is so closely connected
with the beginning of the world, is made more clearly evident by the
verse—

  “Of man’s first disobedience”

which is concerned evidently with the fall, the meaning of which need
not be shown any further. I know the objection which every one
unacquainted with psychoanalysis will raise, viz., that Miss Miller
might just as well have chosen any other verse as an example, and that,
accidentally, she had taken the first one that happened to appear which
had this content, also accidentally. As is well known, the criticism
which we hear equally from our medical colleagues, and from our
patients, is generally based on such arguments. This misunderstanding


arises from the fact that the law of causation in the psychical sphere

is not taken seriously enough; that is to say, there are no accidents,
no “just as wells.” It is so, and there is, therefore, a sufficient
reason at hand why it is so. It is moreover true that Miss Miller’s poem
is connected with the fall, wherein just that erotic component comes
forth, the existence of which we have surmised above.

Miss Miller neglects to tell which passages in Job occurred to her mind.
These, unfortunately, are therefore only general suppositions. Take
first, the analogy to the Lost Paradise. Job lost all that he had, and
this was due to an act of Satan, who wished to incite him against God.
In the same way mankind, through the temptation of the serpent, lost
Paradise, and was plunged into earth’s torments. The idea, or rather the
mood which is expressed by the reference to the Lost Paradise, is Miss
Miller’s feeling that she had lost something which was connected with
satanic temptation. To her it happened, just as to Job, that she
suffered innocently, for she did not fall a victim to temptation. Job’s
sufferings are not understood by his friends;[69] no one knows that
Satan has taken a hand in the game, and that Job is truly innocent. Job
never tires of avowing his innocence. Is there a hint in that? We know


that certain neurotic and especially mentally diseased people

continually defend their innocence against non-existent attacks;
however, one discovers at a closer examination that the patient, while
he apparently defends his innocence without reason, fulfils with that a
“Deckhandlung,” the energy for which arises from just those impulses,


whose sinful character is revealed by the contents of the pretended

reproach and calumny.[70]

Job suffered doubly, on one side through the loss of his fortune, on the
other through the lack of understanding in his friends; the latter can
be seen throughout the book. The suffering of the misunderstood recalls
the figure of Cyrano de Bergerac—he too suffered doubly, on one side
through hopeless love, on the other side through misunderstanding. He
falls, as we have seen, in the last hopeless battle against “Le
Mensonge, les Compromis, les Préjugés, les Lâchetés et la Sottise.—Oui,
Vous m’arrachez tout le laurier et la rose!”


Job laments

      “God delivereth me to the ungodly,
      And casteth me into the hands of the wicked,
      I was at ease, and he brake me asunder;
      Yea, he hath taken me by the neck, and dashed me to pieces:

      “_He hath also set me up for his mark.
      His archers compass me round about_;
      He cleaveth my reins asunder, and doth not spare;
      He poureth out my gall upon the ground.
      He breaketh me with breach upon breach;
      He runneth upon me like a giant.”—_Job_ xvi: 11–15.


The analogy of feeling lies in the suffering of the hopeless struggle