maliciousness by which she excludes the son from immortality. Therefore,
a god must at least rebel, overpower and chastise the mother. (Compare
Adam and Lilith, above.) The “overpowering” signifies incestuous
rape.[533] Herodotus[534] has preserved for us a valuable fragment of
this religious phantasy.

  “And how they celebrate their feast to Isis in the city of Busiris, I
  have already previously remarked. After the sacrifice, all of them,
  men and women, full ten thousand people, begin to beat each other. But
  it would be sin for me to mention for whom they do beat each other.

  “But in Papremis they celebrated the sacrifice with holy actions, as
  in the other places. About the time when the sun sets, some few
  priests are busy around the image; most of them stand at the entrance
  with wooden clubs, and others who would fulfil a vow, more than a
  thousand men, also stand in a group with wooden cudgels opposite them.

  “Now on the eve of the festival, they take the image out in a small
  and gilded temple into another sacred edifice. Then the few who remain
  with the image draw a four-wheeled chariot upon which the temple
  stands with the image which it encloses. But the others who stand in
  the anterooms are not allowed to enter. Those under a vow, who stand
  by the god, beat them off. Now occurs a furious battle with clubs, in
  which they bruise each other’s bodies and as I believe, many even die
  from their wounds: notwithstanding this, the Egyptians consider that
  none die.

  “The natives claim that this festival gathering was introduced for the
  following reason: in this sanctuary lived the mother of Ares.[535] Now


  Ares was brought up abroad and when he became a man he came to have

  _intercourse with his mother_. The servants of his mother who had seen
  him did not allow him to enter peacefully, but prevented him; at which
  he fetched people from another city, who mistreated the servants and
  had entrance to his mother. Therefore, they asserted that this
  slaughter was introduced at the feast for Ares.”


It is evident that the pious here fight their way to a share in the

mystery of the raping of the mother.[536] This is the part which belongs
to them,[537] while the heroic deed belongs to the god.[538] By Ares is
meant the Egyptian Typhon, as we have good reasons to suppose. _Thus
Typhon represents the evil longing for the mother_ with which other myth
forms reproach the mother, according to the well-known example. The
death of Balder, quite analogous to the death of Osiris (attack of
sickness of Rê), because of the wounding by the branch of the mistletoe,
seems to need a similar explanation. It is recounted in the myth how all
creatures were pledged not to hurt Balder, save only the mistletoe,
which was forgotten, presumably because it was too young. This killed
Balder. Mistletoe is a parasite. The female piece of wood in the
fire-boring ritual was obtained[539] from the wood of a parasitical or
creeping plant, the fire mother. The “mare” rests upon “Marentak,” in
which Grimm suspects the mistletoe. The mistletoe was a remedy against
barrenness. In Gaul the Druid alone was allowed to climb the holy oak
amid solemn ceremonies after the completed sacrifice, in order to cut
off the ritual mistletoe.[540] This act is a religiously limited and
organized incest. That which grows on the tree is the child,[541] which
man might have by the mother; then man himself would be in a renewed and
rejuvenated form; and precisely this is what man cannot have, because
the incest prohibition forbids it. As the Celtic custom shows, the act
is performed by the priest only, with the observation of certain
ceremonies; the hero god and the redeemer of the world, however, do the
unpermitted, the superhuman thing, and through it purchase immortality.
The dragon, who must be overcome for this purpose, means, as must have
been for some time clearly seen, the resistance against the incest.
Dragon and serpent, especially with the characteristic accumulation of
anxiety attributes, are the symbolic representations of anxiety which
correspond to the repressed incest wish. It is, therefore, intelligible,
when we come across the tree with the snake again and again (in Paradise
the snake even tempts to sin). The snake or dragon possesses in
particular the meaning of treasure guardian and defender. The phallic,
as well as the feminine, meaning of the dragon[542] indicates that it is
again a symbol of the sexual neutral (or bisexual) libido, that is to
say, a symbol of the _libido in opposition_. In this significance the
black horse, Apaosha, the demon of opposition, appears in the old
Persian song, Tishtriya, where it obstructs the sources of the rain
lake. The white horse Tishtriya makes two futile attempts to vanquish
Apaosha; at the third attempt, with the help of Ahuramazda, he is
successful.[543] Whereupon the sluices of heaven open and a fruitful
rain pours down upon the earth.[544] In this song one sees very
beautifully in the choice of symbol how libido is opposed to libido,
will against will, the discordance of primitive man with himself, which


he recognizes again in all the adversity and contrasts of external

nature.


The symbol of the tree encoiled by the serpent may also be translated as

the mother defended from incest by resistance. This symbol is by no
means rare upon Mithraic monuments. The rock encircled by a snake is to
be comprehended similarly, because Mithra is one born from a rock. The
menace of the new-born by the snake (Mithra, Hercules) is made clear
through the legend of Lilith and Lamia. Python, the dragon of Leto, and
Poine, who devastates the land of Crotopus, are sent by the father of
the new-born. This idea indicates the localization, well known in
psychoanalysis, of the incest anxiety in the father. The father
represents the active repulse of the incest wish of the son. The crime,
unconsciously wished for by the son, is imputed to the father under the
guise of a pretended murderous purpose, this being the cause of the
mortal fear of the son for the father, a frequent neurotic symptom. In
conformity with this idea, the monster to be overcome by the young hero
is frequently a giant, the guardian of the treasure or the woman. A
striking example is the giant Chumbaba in the Gilgamesh epic, who
protected the garden of Ishtar;[545] he is overcome by Gilgamesh,
whereby Ishtar is won. Thereupon she makes erotic advances towards
Gilgamesh.[546] This data should be sufficient to render intelligible
the rôle of Horus in Plutarch, especially the violent usage of Isis.
Through overpowering the mother the hero becomes equal to the sun; he
reproduces himself. He wins the strength of the invincible sun, the
power of eternal rejuvenation. We thus understand a series of
representations from the Mithraic myth on the Heddernheim relief. There
we see, first of all, the birth of Mithra from the top of the tree; the
next representation shows him carrying the conquered bull (comparable to
the monstrous bull overcome by Gilgamesh). This bull signifies the
concentrated significance of the monster, the father, who as giant and
dangerous animal embodies the incest prohibition, and agrees with the
individual libido of the sun-hero, which he overcomes by self-sacrifice.
The third picture represents Mithra, when he grasps the head ornament of
the sun, the nimbus. This act recalls to us, first of all, the violence
of Horus towards Isis; secondly, the Christian basic thought, _that
those who have overcome attain the crown of eternal life_. On the fourth
picture Sol kneels before Mithra. These last two representations show
plainly that Mithra has taken to himself the strength of the sun, so
that he becomes the lord of the sun as well. He has conquered “his
animal nature,” the bull. The animal knows no incest prohibition; man
is, therefore, man because he conquers the incest wish, that is, the
animal nature. Thus Mithra has sacrificed his animal nature, the incest
wish, and with that has overcome the mother, that is to say, “the
terrible death-bringing mother.” A solution is already anticipated in


the Gilgamesh epic through the formal renunciation of the horrible

Ishtar by the hero. The overcoming of the mother in the Mithraic
sacrifice, which had almost an ascetic character, took place no longer
by the archaic overpowering, but through the renunciation, the sacrifice
of the wish. The primitive thought of incestuous reproduction through
entrance into the mother’s womb had already been displaced, because man


was so far advanced in domestication that he believed that the eternal

life of the sun is reached, not through the perpetration of incest, but
through the sacrifice of the incest wish. This important change


expressed in the Mithraic mystery finds its full expression for the

first time in the symbol of the crucified God. A bleeding human
sacrifice was hung on the tree of life for Adam’s sins.[547] The
first-born sacrifices its life to the mother when he suffers, hanging on
the branch, a disgraceful and painful death, a mode of death which
belongs to the most ignominious forms of execution, which Roman
antiquity had reserved for only the lowest criminal. Thus the hero dies,
as if he had committed the most shameful crime; he does this by
returning into the birth-giving branch of the tree of life, at the same
time paying for his guilt with the pangs of death. The animal nature is


repressed most powerfully in this deed of the highest courage and the

greatest renunciation; therefore, a greater salvation is to be expected
for humanity, because such a deed alone seems appropriate to expiate
Adam’s guilt.

[Illustration: BULL-SACRIFICE OF MITHRA]

As has already been mentioned, the hanging of the sacrifice on the tree
is a generally widespread ritual custom, Germanic examples being
especially abundant. The ritual consists in the sacrifice being pierced
by a spear.[548] Thus it is said of Odin (Edda, Havamal):

               “I know that I hung on the windswept tree
               Nine nights through,
               Wounded by a spear, dedicated to Odin
               I myself to myself.”


The hanging of the sacrifice to the cross also occurred in America prior

to its discovery. Müller[549] mentions the Fejervaryian manuscript (a
Mexican hieroglyphic kodex), at the conclusion of which there is a
colossal cross, in the middle of which there hangs a bleeding divinity.
Equally interesting is the cross of Palenque;[550] up above is a bird,
on either side two human figures, who look at the cross and hold a child
against it either for sacrifice or baptism. The old Mexicans are said to
have invoked the favor of Centeotls, “the daughter of heaven and the
goddess of wheat,” every spring by nailing upon the cross a youth or a
maiden and by shooting the sacrifice with arrows.[551] The name of the
Mexican cross signifies “tree of our life or flesh.”[552]


An effigy from the Island of Philae represents Osiris in the form of a

crucified god, wept over by Isis and Nephthys, the sister consort.[553]

The meaning of the cross is certainly not limited to the tree of life,
as has already been shown. Just as the tree of life has also a phallic
sub-meaning (as libido symbol), so there is a further significance to
the cross than life and immortality.[554] Müller uses it as a sign of
rain and of fertility, because it appears among the Indians distinctly
as a magic charm of fertility. It goes without saying, therefore, that
it plays a rôle in the sun cult. It is also noteworthy that the sign of
the cross is an important sign for the keeping away of all evil, like
the ancient gesture of Manofica. The phallic amulets also serve the same
purpose. Zöckler appears to have overlooked the fact that the phallic


Crux Ansata is the same cross which has flourished in countless examples

in the soil of antiquity. Copies of this Crux Ansata are found in many
places, and almost every collection of antiquities possesses one or more
specimens.[555]

Finally, it must be mentioned that the form of the human body is
imitated in the cross as of a man with arms outspread. It is remarkable


that in early Christian representations Christ is not nailed to the

cross, but stands before it with arms outstretched.[556] Maurice[557]
gives a striking basis for this interpretation when he says:

  “It is a fact not less remarkable than well attested, that the Druids


  in their groves were accustomed to select the most stately and