transference. This symbol faces us in an especially marked manner in the
third Logos of the Dieterich papyrus. After the second prayer[129] stars
come from the disc of the sun to the mystic, “five-pointed, in
quantities, filling the whole air. If the sun’s disc has expanded, you
will see an immeasurable circle, and fiery gates which are shut off.”
The mystic utters the following prayer:

  Ἐπακουσόν μου, ἀκουσόν μου—ὁ συνδήσας πνεύματι τὰ πύρινα κλεῖθρα τοῦ
  οὐρανοῦ, δισώματος πυρίπολε, φωτὸς κτίστα—πυρίπνοε, πυρίθυμε,
  πνευματόφως, πυριχαρῆ, καλλίφως, φωτοκράτωρ, πυρισώματε, φωτοδότα,
  πυρισπόρε, πυρικλόνε, φωτόβιε, πυριδῖνα, φωτοκινῆτα, κεραυνοκλόνε,
  φωτὸς κλέος, αὐξησίφως, ἐνπυρισχησίφως, ἀστροδάμα.[130]

The invocation is, as one sees, almost inexhaustible in light and fire
attributes, and can be likened in its extravagance only to the
synonymous attributes of love of the mystic of the Middle Ages. Among
the innumerable texts which might be used as an illustration of this, I


select a passage from the writings of Mechthild von Magdeburg

(1212–1277):

  “O Lord, love me excessively and love me often and long; the oftener
  you love me, so much the purer do I become; the more excessively you
  love me, the more beautiful I become; the longer you love me, the more
  holy will I become here upon earth.”

  God answered: “That I love you often, that I have from my nature, for
  I myself am love. That I love you excessively, that I have from my
  desire, for I too desire that men love me excessively. That I love you
  long, that I have from my everlastingness, for I am without end.”[131]

The religious regression makes use indeed of the parent image without,
however, consciously making it an object of transference, for the incest
horror[132] forbids that. It remains rather as a synonym, for example,
of the father or of God, or of the more or less personified symbol of
the sun and fire.[133] Sun and fire—that is to say, the fructifying
strength and heat—are attributes of the libido. In Mysticism the
inwardly perceived, divine vision is often merely sun or light, and is
very little, or not at all, personified. In the Mithraic liturgy there
is found, for example, a significant quotation:

  Ἡ δὲ πορεία τῶν ὁρωμένων θεῶν διὰ τοῦ δίσκου, πατρός μου, θεοῦ
  φανήσεται.[134]

Hildegarde von Bingen (1100–1178) expresses herself in the following
manner:[135]

  “But the light I see is not local, but far off, and brighter than the
  cloud which supports the sun. I can in no way know the form of this
  light since I cannot entirely see the sun’s disc. But within this
  light I see at times, and infrequently, another light which is called
  by me the living light, but when and in what manner I see this I do
  not know how to say, and when I see it all weariness and need is
  lifted from me, then too, I feel like a simple girl and not like an
  old woman.”

Symeon, the New Theologian (970–1040), says the following:

  “My tongue lacks words, and what happens in me my spirit sees clearly
  but does not explain. It sees the invisible, that emptiness of all
  forms, simple throughout, not complex, and in extent infinite. For it
  sees no beginning, and it sees no end. It is entirely unconscious of
  the meanings, and does not know what to call that which it sees.
  Something complete appears, it seems to me, not indeed through the
  being itself, but through a participation. For you enkindle fire from
  fire, and you receive the whole fire; but this remains undiminished
  and undivided, as before. Similarly, that which is divided separates
  itself from the first; and like something corporeal spreads itself
  into several lights. This, however, is something spiritual,
  immeasurable, indivisible, and inexhaustible. For it is not separated
  when it becomes many, but remains undivided and is in me, and enters
  within my poor heart like a sun or circular disc of the sun, similar
  to the light, for it is a light.”[136]

That that thing, perceived as inner light, as the sun of the other
world, is longing, is clearly shown by Symeon’s words:[137]

  “And following It my spirit demanded to embrace the splendor beheld,


  but it found It not as creature and did not succeed in coming out from

  among created beings, so that it might embrace that uncreated and
  uncomprehended splendor. Nevertheless it wandered everywhere, and
  strove to behold It. _It penetrated the air, it wandered over the
  Heavens, it crossed over the abysses, it searched, as it seemed to it,
  the ends of the world._[138] But in all of that it found nothing, for
  all was created. And I lamented and was sorrowful, and my breast
  burned, and I lived as one distraught in mind. But It came, as It
  would, and descending like a luminous mystic cloud, It seemed to
  envelop my whole head so that dismayed I cried out. But flying away
  again It left me alone. And when I, troubled, sought for It, I
  realized suddenly _that It was in me, myself, and in the midst of my
  heart It appeared as the light of a spherical sun_.”

In Nietzsche’s “Glory and Eternity” we meet with an essentially similar
symbol:

         “Hush! I see vastness!—and of vasty things
         Shall man be done, unless he can enshrine
         Them with his words? Then take the night which brings
         The heart upon thy tongue, charmed wisdom mine!

         “I look above, there rolls the star-strewn sea.
         O night, mute silence, voiceless cry of stars!
         And lo! A sign! The heaven its verge unbars—
         A shining constellation falls towards me.”[139]

It is not astonishing if Nietzsche’s great inner loneliness calls again


into existence certain forms of thought which the mystic ecstasy of the

old cults has elevated to ritual representation. In the visions of the


Mithraic liturgy we have to deal with many similar representations which


we can now understand without difficulty as the ecstatic symbol of the

libido:

  Μετὰ δὲ τὸ ειπεῖν σε τὸν δεύτερον λόγον, ὅπου σιγὴ δὶς καὶ τὰ
  ἀκόλουθα, σύρισον δὶς καὶ πόππυσον δὶς καὶ εὐθέως ὄψει ἀπὸ τοῦ δίσκου
  ἀστέρας προσερχομένους πενταδακτυλιαίους πλείστους καὶ πιπλῶντας ὅλον
  τὸν αέρα. Σὺ δὲ πάλιν λέγε: σιγή, σιγή. Καὶ τοῦ δίσκου ἀνοιγέντος ὄψει
  ἄπειρον κύκλωμα καὶ θύρας πυρίνας ἀποκεκλεισμένας.[140]

Silence is commanded, then the vision of light is revealed. The
similarity of the mystic’s condition and Nietzsche’s poetical vision is
surprising. Nietzsche says “constellation.” It is well known that
constellations are chiefly therio- or anthropo-morphic symbols.

The papyrus says, ἀστέρας πενταδακτυλιαίους[141] (similar to the
“rosy-fingered” Eos), which is nothing else than an anthropomorphic
image. Accordingly, one may expect from that, that by long gazing a
living being would be formed out of the “flame image,” a “star
constellation” of therio- or anthropo-morphic nature, for the symbolism
of the libido does not end with sun, light and fire, but makes use of
wholly other means of expression. I yield precedence to Nietzsche:

                            _The Beacon_[142]

            “Here, where the island grew amid the seas,
            A sacrificial rock high-towering,
            Here under darkling heavens,
            Zarathustra lights his mountain-fires.

            “These flames with grey-white belly,
            In cold distances sparkle their desire,
            Stretches its neck towards ever purer heights—
            A snake upreared in impatience:

            “This signal I set up there before me.
            This flame is mine own soul,
            Insatiable for new distances,
            Speeding upward, upward its silent heat.

            “At all lonely ones I now throw my fishing rod.
            Give answer to the flame’s impatience,
            Let me, the fisher on high mountains,
            Catch my seventh, last solitude!”

Here libido becomes fire, flame and snake. The Egyptian symbol of the
“living disc of the sun,” the disc with the two entwining snakes,
contains the combination of both the libido analogies. The disc of the


sun with its fructifying warmth is analogous to the fructifying warmth

of love. The comparison of the libido with sun and fire is in reality
analogous.

There is also a “causative” element in it, for sun and fire as
beneficent powers are objects of human love; for example, the sun-hero
Mithra is called the “well-beloved.” In Nietzsche’s poem the comparison
is also a causative one, but this time in a reversed sense. The
comparison with the snake is unequivocally phallic, corresponding
completely with the tendency in antiquity, which was to see in the
symbol of the phallus the quintessence of life and fruitfulness. _The
phallus is the source of life and libido, the great creator and worker
of miracles_, and as such it received reverence everywhere. We have,
therefore, three designating symbols of the libido: First, the
_comparison by analogy_, as sun and fire. Second, the _comparisons based
on causative relations_, as A: Object comparison. The libido is
designated by its object, for example, the beneficent sun. B: _The
subject comparison_, in which the libido is designated by its place of
origin or by analogies of this, for example, by phallus or (analogous)
snake.

To these two fundamental forms of comparison still a third is added, in
which the “tertium comparationis” is _the activity_; for example, the
libido is dangerous when fecundating like the bull—through the power of
its passion—like the lion, like the raging boar when in heat, like the
ever-rutting ass, and so on.


This activity comparison can belong equally well to the category of the

analogous or to the category of the causative comparisons. _The


possibilities of comparison mean just as many possibilities for symbolic