pursuer. Naturally, it is not the actual mother, although the actual
mother, with the abnormal tenderness with which she sometimes pursues
her child, even into adult years, may gravely injure it through a
willful prolonging of the infantile state in the child. It is rather the
mother-imago, which becomes the Lamia. The mother-imago, however,
possesses its power solely and exclusively from the son’s tendency not
only to look and to work forwards, but also to glance backwards to the
pampering sweetness of childhood, to that glorious state of
irresponsibility and security with which the protecting mother-care once
surrounded him.[617]


The retrospective longing acts like a paralyzing poison upon the energy

and enterprise; so that it may well be compared to a poisonous serpent
which lies across our path. Apparently, it is a hostile demon which robs
us of energy, but, in reality, it is the individual unconscious, the


retrogressive tendency of which begins to overcome the conscious forward

striving. The cause of this can be, for example, the natural aging which
weakens the energy, or it may be great external difficulties, which
cause man to break down and become a child again, or it may be, and this
is probably the most frequent cause, the woman who enslaves the man, so
that he can no longer free himself, and becomes a child again.[618] It
may be of significance also that Isis, as sister-wife of the sun-god,
creates the poisonous animal from the spittle of the god, which is
perhaps a substitute for sperma, and, therefore, is a symbol of libido.
She creates the animal from the libido of the god; that means she
receives his power, making him weak and dependent, so that by this means
she assumes the dominating rôle of the mother. (Mother transference to
the wife.) This part is preserved in the legend of Samson, in the rôle
of Delilah, who cut off Samson’s hair, the sun’s rays, thus robbing him
of his strength.[619] Any weakening of the adult man strengthens the
wishes of the unconscious; therefore, the decrease of strength appears
directly as the backward striving towards the mother.


There is still to be considered one more source of the reanimation of

the mother-imago. We have already met it in the discussion of the mother
scene in “Faust,” that is to say, _the willed introversion of a creative
mind_, which, retreating before its own problem and inwardly collecting
its forces, dips at least for a moment into the source of life, in order


there to wrest a little more strength from the mother for the completion

of its work. It is a mother-child play with one’s self, in which lies
much weak selfadmiration and self-adulation (“Among a hundred
mirrors”—Nietzsche); _a Narcissus state_, a strange spectacle, perhaps,
for profane eyes. The separation from the mother-imago, the birth out of
one’s self, reconciles all conflicts through the sufferings. This is
probably meant by Nietzsche’s verse:

                 “Why hast thou enticed thyself
                 Into the Paradise of the old serpent?


                 Why hast thou crept

                 Into thyself, thyself?...

                 “A sick man now
                 Sick of a serpent’s poison,[620]


                 A captive now


                 Whom the hardest destiny befell

                 In thine own pit;


                 Bowed down as thou workest

                 Encaved within thyself,
                 Burrowing into thyself,
                 Helpless,
                 Stiff,
                 A corpse.
                 Overwhelmed with a hundred burdens,
                 Overburdened by thyself.
                 A wise man,
                 A self-knower,
                 The wise Zarathustra;


                 Thou soughtest the heaviest burden

                 And foundest thou thyself....”

The symbolism of this speech is of the greatest richness. He is buried
in the depths of _self, as if in the earth_; really a dead man who has
turned back to mother earth;[621] a Kaineus “piled with a hundred
burdens” and pressed down to death; the one who groaning bears the heavy
burden of his own libido, of that libido which draws him back to the
mother. Who does not think of the Taurophoria of Mithra, who took his
bull (according to the Egyptian hymn, “the bull of his mother”), that
is, his love for his mother, the heaviest burden upon his back, and with
that entered upon the painful course of the so-called Transitus![622]
This path of passion led to the cave, in which the bull was sacrificed.
Christ, too, had to bear the cross,[623] the symbol of his love for the
mother, and he carried it to the place of sacrifice where the lamb was
slain in the form of the God, the infantile man, a “self-executioner,”
and then to burial in the subterranean sepulchre.[624]


That which in Nietzsche appears as a poetical figure of speech is really

a primitive myth. It is as if the poet still possessed a dim idea or
capacity to feel and reactivate those imperishable phantoms of long-past
worlds of thought in the words of our present-day speech and in the
images which crowd themselves into his phantasy. Hauptmann also says:
“Poetic rendering is that which allows the echo of the primitive word to
resound through the form.”[625]


The sacrifice, with its mysterious and manifold meaning, which is rather
hinted at than expressed, passes unrecognized in the unconscious of our
author. The arrow is not shot, the hero Chiwantopel is not yet fatally
poisoned and ready for death through self-sacrifice. We now can say,
according to the preceding material, this sacrifice means renouncing the
mother, that is to say, _renunciation of all bonds and limitations which


the soul has taken with it from the period of childhood into the adult

life_. From various hints of Miss Miller’s it appears that at the time
of these phantasies she was still living in the circle of the family,
evidently at an age which was in urgent need of independence. That is to
say, man does not live very long in the infantile environment or in the
bosom of his family without real danger to his mental health. Life calls
him forth to independence, and he who gives no heed to this hard call
because of childish indolence and fear is threatened by a neurosis, and


once the neurosis has broken out it becomes more and more a valid reason


to escape the battle with life and to remain for all time in the morally

poisoned infantile atmosphere.

The phantasy of the arrow-wound belongs in this struggle for personal
independence. The thought of this resolution has not yet penetrated the
dreamer. On the contrary, she rather repudiates it. After all the
preceding, it is evident that the symbolism of the arrow-wound through
direct translation must be taken as a coitus symbol. The “Occide
moriturus” attains by this means the sexual significance belonging to
it. Chiwantopel naturally represents the dreamer. But nothing is
attained and nothing is understood through one’s reduction to the coarse
sexual, because it is a commonplace that the unconscious shelters coitus
wishes, the discovery of which signifies nothing further. _The coitus


wish under this aspect is really a symbol for the individual

demonstration of the libido separated from the parents, of the conquest
of an independent life._ This step towards a new life means, at the same
time, the death of the past life.[626] Therefore, Chiwantopel is the
infantile hero[627] (the son, the child, the lamb, the fish) who is


still enchained by the fetters of childhood and who has to die as a

symbol of the incestuous libido, and with that sever the retrogressive
bond. For the entire libido is demanded for the battle of life, and
there can be no remaining behind. The dreamer cannot yet come to this
decision, which will tear aside all the sentimental connections with
father and mother, and yet it must be made in order to follow the call
of the individual destiny.


                              CHAPTER VII


                          THE DUAL MOTHER RÔLE

After the disappearance of the assailant, Chiwantopel begins the
following monologue:

  “From the extreme ends of these continents, from the farthest
  lowlands, after having forsaken the palace of my father, I have been
  wandering aimlessly during a hundred moons, always pursued by my mad
  desire to find ‘her who will understand.’ With jewels I have tempted
  many fair ones, with kisses I have tried to snatch the secret of their
  hearts, with acts of bravery I have conquered their admiration. (He
  reviews the women he has known.) Chita, the princess of my race ...
  she is a little fool, vain as a peacock, having nought in her head but
  jewels and perfume. Ta-nan, the young peasant, ... bah, a mere sow, no
  more than a breast and a stomach, caring only for pleasure. And then
  Ki-ma, the priestess, a true parrot, repeating hollow phrases learnt
  from the priests; all for show, without real education or sincerity,
  suspicious poseur and hypocrite!... Alas! Not one who understands me,
  not one who resembles me, not one who has a soul sister to mine. There
  is not one among them all who has known my soul, not one who could
  read my thought; far from it; not one capable of seeking with me the
  luminous summits, or of spelling with me the superhuman word, love.”


Here Chiwantopel himself says that his journeying and wandering is a

quest for that other, and for the meaning of life which lies in union
with her. In the first part of this work we merely hinted gently at this
possibility. The fact that the seeker is masculine and the sought-for of
feminine sex is not so astonishing, because the chief object of the
unconscious transference is the mother, as has probably been seen from
that which we have already learned. The daughter takes a male attitude
towards the mother. The genesis of this adjustment can only be suspected
in our case, because objective proof is lacking. Therefore, let us
rather be satisfied with inferences. “She who will understand” means the
mother, in the infantile language. At the same time, it also means the
life companion. As is well known, the sex contrast concerns the libido
but little. The sex of the object plays a surprisingly slight rôle in
the estimation of the unconscious. The object itself, taken as an
objective reality, is but of slight significance. (But it is of greatest
importance whether the libido is transferred or introverted.) The
original concrete meaning of _erfassen_, “to seize,” _begreifen_, “to
touch,” etc., allows us to recognize clearly the under side of the
wish—to find a congenial person. But the “upper” intellectual half is
also contained in it, and is to be taken into account at the same time.


One might be inclined to assume this tendency if it were not that our

culture abused the same, for the misunderstood woman has become almost
proverbial, which can only be the result of a wholly distorted
valuation. On the one side, our culture undervalues most extraordinarily
the importance of sexuality; on the other side, sexuality breaks out as


a direct result of the repression burdening it at every place where it

does not belong, and makes use of such an indirect manner of expression
that one may expect to meet it suddenly almost anywhere. Thus the idea
of the intimate comprehension of a human soul, which is in reality
something very beautiful and pure, is soiled and disagreeably distorted
through the entrance of the indirect sexual meaning.[628] The secondary
meaning or, better expressed, the misuse, which repressed and denied
sexuality forces upon the highest soul functions, makes it possible, for
example, for certain of our opponents to scent in psychoanalysis
prurient erotic confessionals. These are subjective wish-fulfilment
deliria which need no contra arguments. This misuse makes the wish to be
“understood” highly suspicious, if the natural demands of life have not
been fulfilled. Nature has _first claim_ on man; only long afterwards
does the luxury of intellect come. The mediæval ideal of life for the


sake of death needs gradually to be replaced by a natural conception of

life, in which the normal demands of men are thoroughly kept in mind, so


that the desires of the animal sphere may no longer be compelled to drag


down into their service the high gifts of the intellectual sphere in

order to find an outlet. We are inclined, therefore, to consider the
dreamer’s wish for understanding, first of all, as a repressed striving
towards the natural destiny. This meaning coincides absolutely with
psychoanalytic experience, that there are countless neurotic people who


apparently are prevented from experiencing life because they have an

unconscious and often also a conscious repugnance to the sexual fate,
under which they imagine all kinds of ugly things. There is only too


great an inclination to yield to this pressure of the unconscious

sexuality and to experience the dreaded (unconsciously hoped for)
disagreeable sexual experience, so as to acquire by that means a


legitimately founded horror which retains them more surely in the