reality. He can walk, speak and independently attend to a number of
other things. He sees himself in a relation to a world of unlimited
possibilities, but in which he dares to do little or nothing, because he
is as yet too much of a baby and cannot get on without his mother. At
this time mother should be exchanged for the world. Against this the
past rises as the greatest resistance; this is always so whenever man
would undertake a new adaptation. In spite of all evidence and against
all conscious resolutions, the unconscious (the past) always enforces
its standpoint as resistance. In this difficult position, precisely at
this period of developing sexuality, we see the dawning of the mind. The


problem of the child at this period is the discovery of the world and of

the great transsubjective reality. For that he must lose the mother;
every step out into the world means a step away from the mother.
Naturally, all that which is retrogressive in men rebels against this
step, and energetic attempts are made against this adaptation in the
first place. Therefore, this period of life is also that in which the
first clearly developed neuroses arise. The tendency of this age is one
directly opposed to that of dementia præcox. The child seeks to win the
world and to leave the mother (this is a necessary result). The dementia
præcox patient, however, seeks to leave the world and to regain the
subjectivity of childhood. We have seen that in dementia præcox the


recent adaptation to reality is replaced by an archaic mode of

adaptation; that is to say, the recent idea of the world is rejected in
favor of an archaic idea of the world. When the child renounces his task
of adaptation to reality, or has considerable difficulties in this
direction, then we may expect that the recent adaptation will again be
replaced by archaic modes of adaptation. It would, therefore, be


conceivable that through regression in children archaic products would

naturally be unearthed; that is to say, old ways of functioning of the
thought system, which is inborn with the brain differentiation, would be
awakened.

According to my available but as yet unpublished material, a remarkably


archaic and at the same time generally applicable character seems to

appertain to infantile phantasy, quite comparable with the products of
dementia præcox. It does not seem improbable that through regression at


this age those same associations of elements and analogies are

reawakened which formerly constituted the archaic idea of the world.
When we now attempt to investigate the nature of these elements, a


glance at the psychology of myths is sufficient to show us that the

archaic idea was chiefly sexual anthropomorphism. It appears that these
things in the unconscious childish phantasy play an extraordinary rôle,
as we can recognize from examples taken at random. Just as the sexualism


of neuroses is not to be taken literally but as regressive phantasy and

symbolic compensation for a recent unachieved adaptation, so is the
sexualism of the early infantile phantasy, especially the incest
problem, a regressive product of the revival of the archaic modes of
function, outweighing actuality. On this account I have expressed myself
very vaguely in this work, I am sure, in regard to the incest problem.


This is done in order not to be responsible for the idea that I

understand by it a gross sexual inclination towards the parents. The
true facts of the case are much more complicated, as my investigations
point out. Originally incest probably never possessed particularly great
significance as such, because cohabitation with an old woman for all
possible motives could hardly be preferred to mating with a young woman.


It seems that the mother has acquired incestuous significance only

psychologically. Thus, for example, the incestuous unions of antiquity
were not a result of a love inclination, but of a special superstition,
which is most intimately bound up with the mythical ideas here treated.
A Pharaoh of the second dynasty is said to have married his sister, his
daughter and his granddaughter; the Ptolemies were accustomed also to
marriage with sisters; Kambyses married his sister; Artaxerxes married
his two daughters; Qobad I (sixth century A. D.) married his daughter.
The Satrap Sysimithres married his mother. These incestuous unions are


explained by the circumstance that in the Zend Avesta the marriage of

relatives was directly commanded;[813] it emphasized the resemblance of
rulers to the divinity, and, therefore, was more of an artificial than a
natural arrangement, because it originated more from a theoretical than
from a biological inclination. (A practical impetus towards that lay
often in the peculiar laws of inheritance left over from the _Mutter
recht_, “maternal right” [matriarchal], period.) The confusion which


certainly frequently involved the barbarians of antiquity in regard to


the choice of their sexual objects cannot very well be measured by the

standard of present-day love psychology. In any case, the incest of the
semi-animal past is in no way proportionate to the enormous significance
of the incest phantasy among civilized people. This disproportion


enforces the assumption that the incest prohibition which we meet even


amongst relatively lower races concerns rather the mythical ideas than

the biological damage; therefore, the ethnical prohibition almost always
concerns the mother and seldom the father. Incest prohibition can be
understood, therefore, as a result of regression, and as the result of a
libidinous anxiety, which regressively attacks the mother. Naturally, it


is difficult or impossible to say from whence this anxiety may have

come. I merely venture to suggest that it may have been a question of a


primitive separation of the pairs of opposites which are hidden in the

will of life: the will for life and for death. It remains obscure what


adaptation the primitive man tried to evade through introversion and

regression to the parents; but, according to the analogy of the soul
life in general, it may be assumed that the libido, which disturbed the
initial equilibrium of becoming and of ceasing to be, had been stored up
in the attempt to make an especially difficult adaptation, and from
which it recedes even to-day.

After this long digression, let us turn back to the song of the Rigveda.


Thinking and a conception of the world arose from a shrinking back from

stern reality, and it is only after man has regressively assured himself
again of the protective parental power[814] that he enters life wrapped
in a dream of childhood shrouded in magic superstitions; that is to say,
“thinking,”[815] for he, timidly sacrificing his best and assuring
himself of the favor of the invisible powers, step by step develops to
greater power, in the degree that he frees himself from his
retrogressive longing and the original lack of harmony in his being.

Rigveda 10, 90, concludes with the exceedingly significant verse, which
is of greatest importance for the Christian mysteries as well:

 “Gods, sacrificing, rendered homage to the sacrifice: these were the
    earliest holy ordinances,
 The mighty ones attained the height of heaven, there where the Sâdhyas,
    goddesses of old, are dwelling.”

Through the sacrifice a fulness of power was attained, which extends up
to the power of the “parents.” Thus the sacrifice has also the meaning
of a psychologic maturation process.

In the same manner that the world originated through sacrifice, through
the renunciation of the retrospective mother libido, thus, according to
the teachings of the Upanishads, is produced the new condition of man,
which may be termed the immortal. This new condition is again attained
through a sacrifice; namely, through the sacrificial horse which is
given a cosmic significance in the teaching of the Upanishads. What the
sacrificial horse means is told by Brihadâranyaka-Upanishad 1: 1:

                                  “_Om!_

  “1. The dawn is truly the head of the sacrificial horse, the sun his
  eye, the wind his breath, his mouth the all-spreading fire, the year
  is the body of the sacrificial horse. The sky is his back, the
  atmosphere his body cavity, the earth the vault of his belly, the
  poles are his sides, the space between the poles his ribs, the seasons
  his limbs, the months and half-months his joints, day and night his
  feet, the stars his bones, the clouds his flesh, the food, which he
  digests, are the deserts; the rivers, his veins; liver and lungs, the
  mountains; the herbs and trees, his hair; the rising sun is his
  forepart, the setting sun his hind-part. When he shows his teeth, that
  is lightning; when he trembles, that is thunder; when he urinates,
  that is rain; his voice is speech.

  “2. The day, in truth, has originated for the horse as the sacrificial
  dish, which stands before him; his cradle is in the world-sea towards
  the East; the night has originated for him as the sacrificial dish,
  which stands behind him; its cradle is in the world-sea of the
  evening; these two dishes originated in order to surround the horse.
  As a charger he generated the gods, as champion he produced the
  Gandharvas, as a racer the demons, as horse mankind. The Ocean is his
  relative, the ocean his cradle.”

As Deussen remarks, the sacrificial horse has the significance of a
_renunciation of the universe_. When the horse is sacrificed, then the
world is sacrificed and destroyed, as it were—a train of thought which
Schopenhauer also had in mind, and which appears as a product of a
diseased mind in Schreber.[816] The horse in the above text stands
between two sacrificial vessels, from one of which it comes and to the
other of which it goes, just as the sun passes from morning to evening.
The horse, therefore, signifies the libido, which has passed into the
world. We previously saw that the “mother libido” must be sacrificed in
order to produce the world; here the world is destroyed by the repeated
sacrifice of the same libido, which once belonged to the mother. The
horse can, therefore, be substituted as a symbol for this libido,
because, as we saw, it had manifold connections with the mother.[817]


The sacrifice of the horse can only produce another state of

introversion, which is similar to that before the creation of the world.
The position of the horse between the two vessels, which represent the
producing and the devouring mother, hint at the idea of life enclosed in
the ovum; therefore, the vessels are destined to “surround” the horse.
That this is actually so the Brihadâranyaka-Upanishad 3: 3 proves:

  “1. From where have the descendants of Parikshit come, that I ask
  thee, Yâjñavalkya! From where came the descendants of Parikshit?

  “2. Yâjñavalkya spake: ‘He has told thee, they have come from where
  all come, who offer up the sacrificial horse. That is to say, this


  world extends so far as two and thirty days of the chariot of the Gods

  (the sun) reach. This (world) surrounds the earth twice around. This
  earth surrounds the ocean twice around. There is, as broad as the edge
  of a razor or as the wing of a fly, a space between (the two shells of
  the egg of the world). These were brought by Indra as a falcon to the
  wind: and the wind took them up into itself and carried them where
  were the offerers of the sacrificial horse. Somewhat like this he
  spoke (Gandharva to thee) and praised the wind.’

  “Therefore is the wind the special (vyashti) and the wind the
  universal (samashti). He, who knows this, defends himself from dying
  again.”

As this text tells us, the offerers of the sacrificial horse come in
that _narrowest fissure_ between the shells of the egg of the world, at
that place, where the shells _unite and where they are divided_. The
fissure (_vagina_) in the maternal world soul is designated by Plato in
“Timaeus” by Χ, the symbol of the cross. Indra, who as a falcon has
stolen the soma (the treasure attainable with difficulty), brings, as
Psychopompos, the souls to the wind, to the generating pneuma, which
carries them forward to the fissure or vagina, to the point of union, to
the entrance into the maternal egg. This train of thought of the Hindoo


philosophy briefly and concisely summarizes the sense of innumerable

myths; at the same time it is a striking example of the fact that


philosophy is internally nothing else but a refined and sublimated