representation, and in the added boy’s figure, the picture of man and
his penis.[228] The previously mentioned paradox in the Upanishad text
of large and small, of giant and dwarf, is expressed more mildly here by
man and boy, or father and son.[229] The motive of deformity which is
used constantly by the Cabiric cult is present also in the vase picture,
while the parallel figures to Dionysus and Παῖς are the caricatured
Μίτος and Πρατόλαος. Just as formerly the difference in size gave
occasion for division, so does the deformity here.[230]

Without first bringing further proof to bear, I may remark that from


this knowledge especially strong sidelights are thrown upon the original

psychologic meaning of the religious heroes. Dionysus stands in an


intimate relation with the psychology of the early Asiatic God who died


and rose again from the dead and whose manifold manifestations have been


brought together in the figure of Christ into a firm personality

enduring for centuries. We gain from our premise the knowledge that
these heroes, as well as their typical fates, are personifications of
the human libido and its typical fates. They are imagery, like the
figures of our nightly dreams—the actors and interpreters of our secret
thoughts. And since we, in the present day, have the power to decipher


the symbolism of dreams and thereby surmise the mysterious psychologic

history of development of the individual, so a way is here opened to the


understanding of the secret springs of impulse beneath the psychologic

development of races. Our previous trains of thought, which demonstrate
the phallic side of the symbolism of the libido, also show how
thoroughly justified is the term “libido.”[231] Originally taken from
the sexual sphere, this word has become the most frequent technical
expression of psychoanalysis, for the simple reason that its


significance is wide enough to cover all the unknown and countless

manifestations of the Will in the sense of Schopenhauer. It is


sufficiently comprehensive and rich in meaning to characterize the real

nature of the psychical entity which it includes. The exact classical


significance of the word libido qualifies it as an entirely appropriate

term. Libido is taken in a very wide sense in Cicero:[232]

  “(Volunt ex duobus opinatis) bonis (nasci) Libidinem et Lætitiam; ut
  sit lætitia præsentium bonorum: libido futurorum.—Lætitia autem et
  Libido in bonorum opinione versantur, cum Libido ad id, quod videtur
  bonum, illecta et inflammata rapiatur.—Natura enim omnes ea, quæ bona
  videntur, sequuntur, fugiuntque contraria. Quamobrem simul objecta
  species cuiuspiam est, quod bonum videatur, ad id adipiscendum
  impellit ipsa natura. Id cum constanter prudenterque fit, ejusmodi
  appetitionem stoici βούλησιν appellant, nos appellamus voluntatem; eam
  illi putant in solo esse sapiente, quam sic definiunt; voluntas est
  quæ quid cum ratione desiderat: quæ autem ratione adversa incitata est
  vehementius, ea libido est, vel cupiditas effrenata, quæ in omnibus
  stultis invenitur.”[233]

The meaning of libido here is “to wish,” and in the stoical distinction
of will, dissolute desire. Cicero[234] used “libido” in a corresponding
sense:

            “Agere rem aliquam libidine, non ratione.”[235]

In the same sense Sallust says:

                    “Iracundia pars est libidinis.”

In another place in a milder and more general sense, which completely
approaches the analytical use:

  “Magisque in decoris armis et militaribus equis, quam in scortis et
  conviviis libidinem habebant.”[235]

Also:

             “Quod si tibi bona libido fuerit patriæ, etc.”

The use of libido is so general that the phrase “libido est scire”
merely had the significance of “I will, it pleases me.” In the phrase
“aliquam libido urinæ lacessit” libido had the meaning of urgency. The
significance of sexual desire is also present in the classics.


This general classical application of the conception agrees with the

corresponding etymological context of the word, _libido_ or _lubido_
(with _libet_, more ancient _lubet_), it pleases me, and _libens_ or
_lubens_ = gladly, willingly. Sanskrit, _lúbhyati_ = to experience
violent longing, _lôbhayati_ = excites longing, _lubdha-h_ = eager,
_lôbha-h_ = longing, eagerness. Gothic = _liufs_, and Old High German
_liob_ = love. Moreover, in Gothic, _lubains_ was represented as hope;
and Old High German, _lobôn_ = to praise, _lob_ = commendation, praise,
glory; Old Bulgarian, _ljubiti_ = to love, _ljuby_ = love; Lithuanian,
_liáupsinti_ = to praise.[236] It can be said that the conception of


libido as developed in the new work of Freud and of his school has


functionally the same significance in the biological territory as has


the conception of energy since the time of Robert Mayer in the physical

realm.[237] It may not be superfluous to say something more at this


point concerning the conception of libido after we have followed the


formation of its symbol to its highest expression in the human form of

the religious hero.


                               CHAPTER II


            THE CONCEPTION AND THE GENETIC THEORY OF LIBIDO


The chief source of the history of the analytic conception of libido is

Freud’s “Three Contributions to the Sexual Theory.” There the term


libido is conceived by him in the original narrow sense of sexual

impulse, sexual need. Experience forces us to the assumption of a
capacity for displacement of the libido, because functions or
localizations of non-sexual force are undoubtedly capable of taking up a
certain amount of libidinous sexual impetus, a libidinous afflux.[238]
Functions or objects could, therefore, obtain sexual value, which under
normal circumstances really have nothing to do with sexuality.[239] From
this fact results the Freudian comparison of the libido with a stream,
which is divisible, which can be dammed up, which overflows into
branches, and so on.[240] Freud’s original conception does not interpret
“everything sexual,” although this has been asserted by critics, but
recognizes the existence of certain forces, the nature of which are not
well known; to which Freud, however, compelled by the notorious facts
which are evident to any layman, grants the capacity to receive
“affluxes of libido.” The hypothetical idea at the basis is the symbol
of the “Triebbündel”[241] (bundle of impulses), wherein the sexual
impulse figures as a partial impulse of the whole system, and its
encroachment into the other realms of impulse is a fact of experience.
The theory of Freud, branching off from this interpretation, according


to which the motor forces of a neurotic system correspond precisely to

their libidinous additions to other (non-sexual) functional impulses,
has been sufficiently proven as correct, it seems to me, by the work of
Freud and his school.[242] Since the appearance of the “Three
Contributions,” in 1905, a change has taken place[243] in the libido
conception; its field of application has been widened. An extremely
clear example of this amplification is this present work. However, I
must state that Freud, as well as myself, saw the need of widening the
conception of libido. It was paranoia, so closely related to dementia
præcox, which seemed to compel Freud to enlarge the earlier limits of
the conception. The passage in question, which I will quote here, word
for word, reads:[244]

  “A third consideration which presents itself, in regard to the views
  developed here, starts the query as to whether we should accept as


  sufficiently effectual the universal receding of the libido from the

  outer world, in order to interpret from that, the end of the world: or
  whether in this case, the firmly rooted possession of the ‘I’ must not
  suffice to uphold the rapport with the outer world. Then one must
  either let that which we call possession of the libido (interest from
  erotic sources) coincide with interest in general, or else take into


  consideration the possibility that great disturbance in the


  disposition of the libido can also induce a corresponding disturbance

  in the possession of the ‘I.’ Now, these are the problems, which we
  are still absolutely helpless and unfitted to answer. Things would be
  different could we proceed from a safe fund of knowledge of instinct.
  But the truth is, we have nothing of that kind at our disposal. We


  understand instinct as the resultant of the reaction of the somatic

  and the psychic. We see in it the psychical representation of organic
  forces and take the popular distinction between the ‘I’ impulse and
  the sexual impulse, which appears to us to be in accord with the
  biological double rôle of the individual being who aspires to his own
  preservation as well as to the preservation of the species. But
  anything beyond this is a structure, which we set up, and also


  willingly let fall again in order to orient ourselves in the confusion

  of the dark processes of the soul; we expect particularly, from the
  psychoanalytic investigations into diseased soul processes, to have


  certain decisions forced upon us in regard to questions of the theory

  of instinct. This expectation has not yet been fulfilled on account of
  the still immature and limited investigations in these fields. At


  present the possibility of the reaction of libido disturbance upon the

  possession of the ‘I’ can be shown as little as the reverse; the


  secondary or induced disturbances of the libido processes through

  abnormal changes in the ‘I.’ It is probable that processes of this
  sort form the distinctive character of the psychoses. The conclusions
  arising from this, in relation to paranoia, are at present uncertain.


  One cannot assert that the paranoiac has completely withdrawn his

  interest from the outer world, nor withdrawn into the heights of
  repression, as one sometimes sees in certain other forms of
  hallucinatory psychoses. He takes notice of the outer world, he takes
  account of its changes, he is stirred to explanations by their
  influence, and therefore I consider it highly probable that the
  changed relation to the world is to be explained, wholly or in great
  part, by the deficiency of the libido interest.”


In this passage Freud plainly touches upon the question whether the

well-known longing for reality of the paranoic dement (and the dementia
præcox patients),[245] to whom I have especially called attention in my
book, “The Psychology of Dementia Præcox,”[246] is to be traced back to
the withdrawal of the “libidinous affluxes” alone, or whether this
coincides with the so-called objective interest in general. It is hardly
to be assumed that the normal “fonction du réel” (Janet)[247] is
maintained only through affluxes of libido or erotic interest. The fact
is that in very many cases reality disappears entirely, so that not a
trace of psychological adaptation or orientation can be recognized.


Reality is repressed under these circumstances and replaced by the

contents of the complex. One must of necessity say that not only the
erotic interest but the interest in general has disappeared, that is to
say, the whole adaptation to reality has ceased. To this category belong
the stuporose and catatonic automatons.

I have previously made use of the expression “psychic energy” in my
“Psychology of Dementia Præcox” because I was unable to establish the


theory of this psychosis upon the conception of the displacement of the

affluxes of libido. My experience, at that time chiefly psychiatric, did
not enable me to understand this theory. However, the correctness of
this theory in regard to neuroses, strictly speaking the transference
neuroses, was proven to me later after increased experience in the field
of hysteria and compulsion neuroses. In the territory of these neuroses


it is mainly a question whether any portion of the libido which is


spared through the specific repression becomes introverted and

regressive into earlier paths of transference; for example, the path of
the parental transference.[248] With that, however, the former
non-sexual psychologic adaptation to the environment remains preserved


so far as it does not concern the erotic and its secondary positions

(symptoms). The reality which is lacking to the patients is just that
portion of the libido to be found in the neurosis. In dementia præcox,
on the contrary, not merely that portion of libido which is saved in the
well-known specific sexual repression is lacking for reality, but much


more than one could write down to the account of sexuality in a strict