realized that this activity was the normal, although entirely
unconscious, expression of the child’s developing life, and while not
comparable to the adult sexuality, nevertheless produced a very definite
influence and effect on the child’s life.

These childish expressions of this instinct he called “polymorphous
perverse,” because in many ways they resembled the various abnormalities
called perversions when found among adults under certain conditions.


In the light of these additional investigations Freud was led to change

his formulation, for instead of the symptoms of the neurotic patient
being due to definite sexual experiences, they seemed to be determined


by his reactions towards his own sexual constitution and the kind of

repression to which these instincts were subjected.


Perhaps one of the greatest sources of misunderstanding and difficulty

in this whole subject lies in the term sexuality, for Freud’s conception
of this is entirely different from that of the popular sense. He
conceives sexuality to be practically synonymous with the word _love_


and to include under this term all those tender feelings and emotions

which have had their origin in a primitive erotic source, even if now
their primary aim is entirely lost and another substituted for it. It


must also be borne in mind that Freud strictly emphasizes the psychic

side of sexuality and its importance, as well as the somatic expression.

Therefore, to understand Freud’s theories, his very broad conception of
the term sexual must never be forgotten.


Through this careful investigation of the psychic life of the

individual, the tremendous influence and importance of phantasy-making
for the fate was definitely shown. It was discovered that the indulgence
in day-dreams and phantasies was practically universal not only among
children but among adults, that even whole lives were being lived out in
a phantastic world created by the dreamer, a world wherein he could


fulfil all those wishes and desires which were found to be too difficult

or impossible to satisfy in the world of reality.

Much of this phantasy thinking was seen to be scarcely conscious, but
arose from unrealized wishes, desires and strivings which could only


express themselves through veiled symbols in the form of phantastic

structures not understood, nor fully recognized. Indeed, it is perhaps
one of the most common human experiences to find “queer thoughts,”
undesired ideas and images, forcing themselves upon one’s attention to


such an extent that the will has to be employed to push them out of

mind. It is not unusual to discover long-forgotten impressions of
childhood assuming a phantastic shape in memory, and dwelt upon as
though they were still of importance.

This material afforded a rich field for the searchers into the soul, for


through the operation of the law of association of ideas these

phantastic products, traced back to their origin, revealed the fact that
instead of being meaningless or foolish, they were produced by a
definite process, and arose from distinct wishes and desires which
unconsciously veiled themselves in these mysterious forms and pictures.


It is conceded that the most completely unconscious product of an

individual is his dream, and therefore Professor Freud turned his
attention from phantasies and day-dreams to the investigation of the


nightly dreams of his patients to discover whether they would throw


light upon the painful feelings and ideas repressed out of

consciousness, and therefore inaccessible to direct revelation.

This brilliant idea soon led to a rich fruiting, for it became evident


that contrary to the usual conception that the dream is a phantastic and

absurd jumble of heterogeneous fragments, having no real relation to the
life of the individual, it is full of meaning. In fact, it is usually
concerned with the problem of life most pressing at the time, which
expresses itself not directly, but in symbolic form so as to be
unrecognized. In this way the individual gains an expression and
fulfilment of his unrealized wish or desire.


This discovery of the symbolic nature of the dream and the phantasy was


brought about entirely through the associative method and developed

empirically through investigations of the dreams of many people. In this


manner it became evident that certain ideas and objects which recurred


again and again in the dreams and phantasies of different people were


definitely associated with certain unconscious or unrecognized wishes

and desires, and were repeatedly used by the mind to express these
meanings where a direct form was repressed and unallowed. Thus certain


dream expressions and figures were in a general way considered to be


rather definite symbols of these repressed ideas and feelings found in

the unconscious. Through a comparative and parallel study it soon


appeared that there was a similar mechanism at work in myths and fairy


tales and that the relationship between the dreams and phantasies of an


individual and the myths and folk tales of a people was so close that


Abraham could say that the myth is a fragment of the infantile soul life

of the race and the dream is the myth of the individual.


Thus through relating his dreams the patient himself furnished the most


important means of gaining access to the unconscious and disturbing

complexes with which his symptoms were connected.


Besides the dream analysis the patient furnished other means of

revelation of his complexes—his mannerisms and unconscious acts, his
opening remarks to his physician, his emotional reactions to certain
ideas; in short the whole behavior and verbal expressions of the
individual reveal his inner nature and problems.


Through all this work it became clear that in the emotional nature lay

the origin not only of the various nervous illnesses themselves, but


also of the isolated symptoms and individual idiosyncrasies and


peculiarities which are the part of all humanity and that the pathogenic

cause of the disturbances lies not in the ignorance of individuals, but


in those inner resistances which are the underlying basis of this

ignorance.


Therefore the aim of the therapy became not merely the relief of the

ignorance but the searching out and combating of these resistances.


It becomes evident from even this brief description of the analytic

procedure that we are dealing with a very complex and delicate material,


and with a technique which needs to make definite use of all influences

available for the help of the patient. It has long been recognized that


the relation established between physician and patient has a great

effect upon the medical assistance which he is able to render—in other
words, if a confidence and personal regard developed in the patient
towards the physician, the latter’s advice was just so much more
efficacious. This personal feeling has been frankly recognized and made


of distinct service in psychoanalytic treatment under the name of

_transference_. It is through the aid of this definite relationship


which must be established in the one being analyzed towards the analyst


that it is possible to deal with the unconscious and organized


resistances which so easily blind the individual and render the


acceptance of the new valuations very difficult to the raw and sensitive

soul.

Freud’s emphasis upon the rôle of the sexual instinct in the production


of the neurosis and also in its determining power upon the personality


of the normal individual does not imply that he does not also recognize

other determinants at the root of human conduct, as for instance, the
instinct for preservation of life and the ego principle itself. But


these motives are not so violently forbidden and repressed as the sexual

impulse, and therefore, because of that repressive force and the


strength of the impulse he considers this primary in its influence upon

the human being.


The importance of this instinct upon human life is clearly revealed by

the great place given to it under the name of love in art, literature,
poetry, romance and all beauty from the beginning of recorded time.


Viewed in this light it cannot seem extraordinary that a difficulty or

disturbance in this emotional field should produce such far-reaching
consequences for the individual. The sexual impulse is often compared
with that of hunger, and this craving and need lying in all humanity is
called by Freud _libido_.


                          THE OEDIPUS PROBLEM


With further investigations into the nature of the repressed complexes a

very astonishing situation was revealed. The parental influence on


children is something so well recognized and understood that to call

attention to it sounds much like a banality. However, here an
extraordinary discovery was made, for in tracing out the feelings and


emotions of adults it became evident that this influence was paramount

not only for children but for adults as well; that the entire direction


of lives was largely determined quite unconsciously by the parental

associations, and that, although adults, the emotional side of their


nature was still infantile in type and demanded unconsciously the

infantile or childish relations.


Freud traces out the commencement of the infantile attachment for the

parents in this wise.


In the beginning the child derives its first satisfaction and pleasure

from the mother in the form of nutrition and care for its wants. In this
first act of suckling Freud sees already a kind of sexual pleasure, for


he apparently identifies the pleasure principle and the sexual instinct

and considers that the former is primarily rooted in the latter. At this


early time commence such various infantile actions unconnected with

nutrition as thumbsucking, various movements of the body as rubbing,
boring, pulling and other manifestations of a definite interest in its
own body, a delight in nakedness, the pleasure exhibited in inflicting
pain on some object and its opposite, the pleasure from receiving pain.
All of these afford the child pleasure and satisfaction, and because


they seem analogous to certain perversions in adults they are called by

Freud the “polymorphous perverse sexuality” of childhood. The character


of these instinctive actions which have nothing to do with any other

person, and through which the child attains pleasure from its own body,


caused Freud to term this phase of life as autoerotic after Havelock

Ellis. However, with the growth of the child there is a parallel


development of the psychic elements of its sexual nature and now the

mother, the original object of its love, primarily determined by its
helplessness and need, acquires a new valuation. The beginnings of the


need for a love object to satisfy the craving or libido of the child are

early in evidence and, following along sex lines in general, the little


son prefers the mother and the daughter the father after the usual

preference of the parents.


At this early time children feel deeply the enormous importance of their

parents and their entire world is bounded by the family circle. All the
elements of the ego which the child possesses have now become manifest;
love, jealousy, curiosity, hate, etc., and those instincts are directed
in the greatest degree towards the objects of their libido, namely the
parents. With the growing ego of the child there is a development of


strong wishes and desires demanding satisfaction which can only be

gratified by the mother; therefore there is aroused in the small son the


feeling of jealousy and anger towards the father in whom he sees a rival

for the affection of the mother and whom he would like to replace. This
desire in the soul of the child Freud calls the _Oedipus complex_ in


recognition of its analogy to the tragedy of King Oedipus who was drawn

by his fate to kill his father and win his mother for a wife. Freud
presents this as the _nuclear complex_ of every neurosis.

At the basis of this complex, some trace of which can be found in every
person, Freud sees a definite incest wish towards the mother which only
lacks the quality of consciousness. Because of moral reactions this wish
is quickly subjected to repression through the operation of the “incest
barrier,” a postulate he compares to the incest taboo found among
inferior peoples. At this time the child is beginning to develop its
typical sexual curiosity expressed by the question, “Where do I come
from?” The interest and investigation of the child into this problem,


aided by observations and deductions from various actions and attitudes

of the parents, who have no idea of the watchfulness of the child, lead
him, because of his imperfect knowledge and immature development, into
many false theories and ideas of birth. These infantile sexual theories
are held by Freud to be determinative in the development of the child’s


character and also for the contents of the unconscious as expressed in a

future neurosis.


These various reactions of the child and his sexual curiosity are

entirely normal and unavoidable, and if his development proceeds in an
orderly fashion then, at the time of definite object choice he will pass


smoothly over from the limitations of the family attachment out into the

world and find therein his independent existence.

However, if the libido remains fixed on the first chosen object so that


the growing individual is unable to tear himself loose from these

familial ties, then the incestuous bond is deepened with the developing
sexual instinct and its accompanying need of a love object, and the
entire future of the young personality endangered. For with the


development of the incestuous bond the natural repressions deepen


because the moral censor cannot allow these disturbing relations to

become clear to the individual. Therefore, the whole matter is repressed
more deeply into the unconscious, and even a feeling of positive enmity


and repulsion towards the parents is often developed in order to conceal

and over-compensate for the impossible situation actually present.

This persistence of the attachment of the libido to the original object,


and the inability to find in this a suitable satisfaction for the adult

need, interferes with the normal development of the psycho-sexual
character, and it is due to this that the adult retains that
“infantilism of sexuality” which plays so great a rôle in determining


the instability of the emotional life which so frequently leads into the

definite neuroses.


These were the conclusions reached and the ground on which Freudian