withdrawn from it through onanism, since, instead of the displacement, a
regression to the local sexual takes place, which is precisely the
opposite of that which is desirable. Psychologically, however, onanism
is a discovery of a significance not to be undervalued. One is protected
from fate, since no sexual need then has the power to give one up to
life. For with onanism one has the greatest magic in one’s hands; one
needs only to phantasy, and with that to masturbate, then one possesses
all the pleasure of the world, and is no longer compelled to conquer the
world of one’s desires through hard labor and wrestling with
reality.[338] Aladdin rubs his lamp and the obedient genii stand at his
bidding; thus the fairy tale expresses the great psychologic advantage
of the easy regression to the local sexual satisfaction. Aladdin’s
symbol subtly confirms the ambiguity of the magic fire preparation.


The close relation of the generation of fire to the onanistic act is

illustrated by a case, the knowledge of which I owe to Dr. Schmid, in
Cery, that of an imbecile peasant youth who set many incendiary fires.


At one of these conflagrations he drew suspicion to himself by his

behavior. He stood with his hands in his trouser pockets in the door of
an opposite house and gazed with apparent delight at the fire. Under
examination in the insane asylum, he described the fire in great detail,
and made suspicious movements in his trouser pockets with his hands. The
physical examination undertaken at once showed that he had masturbated.


Later he confessed that he had masturbated at the time when he had

enjoyed the fire which he had enkindled himself.

The preparation of fire in itself is a perfectly ordinary useful custom,
employed everywhere for many centuries, which in itself involved nothing
more mysterious than eating and drinking. However, there was always a


tendency from time to time to prepare fire in a ceremonious and

mysterious manner (exactly as with ritual eating and drinking), which


was to be carried out in an exactly prescribed way and from which no one

dared differ. This mysterious tendency associated with the technique is
the second path in the onanistic regression, always present by the side
of culture. The strict rules applied to it, the zeal of the ceremonial


preparations and the religious awe of the mysteries next originate from

this source; the ceremonial, although apparently irrational, is an
extremely ingenious institution from the psychologic standpoint, for it


represents a substitute for the possibility of onanistic regression

accurately circumscribed by law. The law cannot apply to the content of
the ceremony, for it is really quite indifferent for the ritual act,
whether it is carried out in this way or in that way. On the contrary,


it is very essential whether the restrained libido is discharged through

a sterile onanism or transposed into the path of sublimation. These
severe measures of protection apply primarily to onanism.[339]


I am indebted to Freud for a further important reference to the

onanistic nature of the fire theft, or rather the motive of _the
treasure difficult of attainment_ (to which fire theft belongs).


Mythology contains repeated formulas which read approximately as

follows: The treasure must be plucked or torn off from a taboo tree
(Paradise tree, Hesperides); this is a forbidden and dangerous act. The


clearest example of this is the old barbaric custom in the service of

Diana of Aricia: only he can become a priest of the goddess who, in her
sacred grove, dares to tear off (“abzureissen”) a bough. The tearing off
has been retained in vulgar speech (besides “abreiben,” rubbing) as a
symbol of the act of onanism. Thus “reiben,” to rub, is like “reissen,”
to break off, both of which are contained in manthami and united


apparently only through the myth of the fire theft bound up in the act

of onanism in a deeper stratum wherein “reiben,” properly speaking,
“reissen,” is employed, but in a transferred sense. Therefore, it might
perhaps be anticipated that in the deepest stratum, namely, the
incestuous, which precedes the autoerotic stage,[340] the two meanings
coincide, which, through lack of mythological tradition, can perhaps be
traced through etymology only.


                               CHAPTER IV


                   THE UNCONSCIOUS ORIGIN OF THE HERO

Prepared by the previous chapters, we approach the personification of
the libido in the form of a conqueror, a hero or a demon. With this,
symbolism leaves the impersonal and neuter realm, which characterizes
the astral and meteorologic symbol, and takes human form: the figure of
a being changing from sorrow to joy, from joy to sorrow, and which, like
the sun, sometimes stands in its zenith, sometimes is plunged in darkest
night, and arises from this very night to new splendor.[341] Just as the
sun, guided by its own internal laws, ascends from morn till noon, and
passing beyond the noon descends towards evening, leaving behind its
splendor, and then sinks completely into the all-enveloping night, thus,
too, does mankind follow his course according to immutable laws, and
also sinks, after his course is completed, into night, in order to rise
again in the morning to a new cycle in his children. The symbolic
transition from sun to man is easy and practicable. The third and last
creation of Miss Miller’s also takes this course. She calls this piece
“Chiwantopel,” a “hypnagogic poem.” She gives us the following


information about the circumstances surrounding the origin of this

phantasy:

  “After an evening of care and anxiety, I lay down to sleep at about
  half past eleven. I felt excited and unable to sleep, although I was
  very tired. There was no light in the room. I closed my eyes, and then
  I had the feeling that something was about to happen. The sensation of
  a general relaxation came over me, and I remained as passive as
  possible. Lines appeared before my eyes,—sparks and shining spirals,
  followed by a kaleidoscopic review of recent trivial occurrences.”


The reader will regret with me that we cannot know the reason for her

cares and anxieties. It would have been of great importance for what
follows to have information on this point. This gap in our knowledge is
the more to be deplored because, between the first poem in 1898 and the
time of the phantasy here discussed (1902), four whole years have
passed. All information is lacking regarding this period, during which
the great problem surely survived in the unconscious. Perhaps this lack


has its advantages in that our interest is not diverted from the


universal applicability of the phantasy here produced by sympathy in

regard to the personal fate of the author. Therefore, something is


obviated which often prevents the analyst in his daily task from looking


away from the tedious toil of detail to that wider relation which


reveals each neurotic conflict to be involved with human fate as a

whole.


The condition depicted by the author here corresponds to such a one as

usually precedes an intentional somnambulism[342] often described by
spiritualistic mediums. A certain inclination to listen to these low
nocturnal voices must be assumed; otherwise such fine and hardly
perceptible inner experiences pass unnoticed. We recognize in this


listening a current of the libido leading inward and beginning to flow

towards a still invisible, mysterious goal. It seems that the libido has


suddenly discovered an object in the depths of the unconscious which

powerfully attracts it. The life of man, turned wholly to the external
by nature, does not ordinarily permit such introversion; there must,
therefore, be surmised a certain exceptional condition, that is to say,
a lack of external objects, which compels the individual to seek a
substitute for them in his own soul. It is, however, difficult to


imagine that this rich world has become too poor to offer an object for

the love of human atoms; nor can the world and its objects be held
accountable for this lack. It offers boundless opportunities for every
one. It is rather the _incapacity to love which robs mankind of his
possibilities_. This world is empty to him alone who does not understand
how to direct his libido towards objects, and to render them alive and
beautiful for himself, for Beauty does not indeed lie in things, but in
the feeling that we give to them. That which compels us to create a
substitute for ourselves is not the external lack of objects, but our
incapacity to lovingly include a thing outside of ourselves. Certainly


the difficulties of the conditions of life and the adversities of the

struggle for existence may oppress us, yet even adverse external
situations would not hinder the giving out of the libido; on the
contrary, they may spur us on to the greatest exertions, whereby we
bring our whole libido into reality. Real difficulties alone will never


be able to force the libido back permanently to such a degree as to give

rise, for example, to a neurosis. _The conflict, which is the condition
of every neurosis, is lacking._ The resistance, which opposes its
unwillingness to the will, alone has the power to produce that


pathogenic introversion which is the starting point of every psychogenic

disturbance. The resistance against loving produces the inability to
love. Just as the normal libido is comparable to a steady stream which
pours its waters broadly into the world of reality, so the resistance,
dynamically considered, is comparable, not so much to a rock rearing up
in the river bed which is flooded over or surrounded by the stream, as
to a backward flow towards the source. A part of the soul desires the
outer object; another part, however, harks back to the subjective world,
where the airy and fragile palaces of phantasy beckon. One can assume
the dualism of the human will for which Bleuler, from the psychiatric
point of view, has coined the word “ambitendency”[343] as something
generally present, bearing in mind that even the most primitive motor
impulse is in opposition; as, for example, in the act of extension, the
flexor muscles also become innervated. This normal ambitendency,
however, never leads to an inhibition or prevention of the intended act,


but is the indispensable preliminary requirement for its perfection and

coördination. For a resistance disturbing to this act to arise from this


harmony of finely attuned opposition an abnormal plus or minus would be

needed on one or the other side. The resistance originates from this
added third.[344] This applies also to the duality of the will, from
which so many difficulties arise for mankind. The abnormal third frees
the pair of opposites, which are normally most intimately united, and
causes their manifestation in the form of separate tendencies; it is
only thus that they become willingness and unwillingness, which
interfere with each other. The Bhagavad-Gîtâ says, “Be thou free of the
pairs of opposites.”[345] The harmony thus becomes disharmony. It cannot
be my task here to investigate whence the unknown third arises, and what
it is. Taken at the roots in the case of our patients, the “nuclear
complex” (Freud) reveals itself as the _incest problem_. The sexual
libido regressing to the parents appears as the incest tendency. The


reason this path is so easily travelled is due to the enormous indolence

of mankind, which will relinquish no object of the past, but will hold
it fast forever. The “sacrilegious backward grasp” of which Nietzsche
speaks reveals itself, stripped of its incest covering, as an original
passive arrest of the libido in its first object of childhood. This
indolence is also a passion, as La Rochefoucauld[346] has brilliantly
expressed it:

  “Of all passions, that which is least known to ourselves is indolence:
  it is the most ardent and malignant of them all, although its violence
  may be insensible, and the injuries it causes may be hidden; if we
  will consider its power attentively, we will see that it makes itself,
  upon all occasions, mistress of our sentiments, of our interests, and
  of our pleasures; it is the anchor, which has the power to arrest the
  largest vessels; it is a calm more dangerous to the most important
  affairs than rocks and the worst tempest. The repose of indolence is a


  secret charm of the soul which suddenly stops the most ardent pursuits

  and the firmest resolutions; finally to give the true idea of this
  passion, one must say that indolence is like a beatitude of the soul


  which consoles it for all its losses and takes the place of all its

  possessions.”

This dangerous passion, belonging above all others to primitive man,
appears under the hazardous mask of the incest symbol, from which the
incest fear must drive us away, and which must be conquered, in the
first place, under the image of the “terrible mother.”[347] It is the
mother of innumerable evils, not the least of which are neurotic
troubles. For, especially from the fogs of the arrested remnants of the
libido, arise the harmful phantasmagoria which so veil reality that
adaptation becomes almost impossible. However, we will not investigate
any further in this place the foundations of the incest phantasies. The