  us, for it is the foundation upon which the higher rational faculty
  developed, and which is still developing in every individual. The
  dream carries us back into earlier states of human culture, and
  affords us a means of understanding it better. The dream thought is so
  easy to us now, because we are so thoroughly trained to it through the


  interminable stages of evolution during which this phantastic and

  facile form of theorizing has prevailed. To a certain extent the dream
  is a restorative for the brain, which during the day is called upon to
  meet the severe demands for trained thought, made by the conditions of
  a higher civilization.

  “From these facts, we can understand how lately more acute logical
  thinking, the taking seriously of cause and effect, has been
  developed; when our functions of reason and intelligence still reach
  back involuntarily to those primitive forms of conclusion, and we live
  about half our lives in this condition.”

We have already seen that Freud, independently of Nietzsche, has reached
a similar standpoint from the basis of dream analysis. The step from


this established proposition to the perception of the myths as familiar

dream images is no longer a great one. Freud has formulated this
conclusion himself.[36]

  “The investigation of this folk-psychologic formation, myths, etc., is
  by no means finished at present. To take an example of this, however,


  it is probable that the myths correspond to the distorted residue of

  wish phantasies of whole nations, the secularized dreams of young
  humanity.”

Rank[37] understands the myths in a similar manner, as a mass dream of
the people.[38] Riklin[39] has insisted rightly upon the dream mechanism
of the fables, and Abraham[40] has done the same for the myths. He says:

  “The myth is a fragment of the infantile soul-life of the people.”


and

  “Thus the myth is a _sustained, still remaining_ fragment from the
  infantile soul-life of the people, and the dream is the myth of the
  individual.”

An unprejudiced reading of the above-mentioned authors will certainly


allay all doubts concerning the intimate connection between dream

psychology and myth psychology. The conclusion results almost from
itself, that the age which created the myths thought childishly—that is
to say, phantastically, as in our age is still done, to a very great
extent (associatively or analogically) in dreams. The beginnings of myth
formations (in the child), the taking of phantasies for realities, which
is partly in accord with the historical, may easily be discovered among
children.


One might raise the objection that the mythological inclinations of

children are implanted by education. The objection is futile. Has
humanity at all ever broken loose from the myths? Every man has eyes and
all his senses to perceive that the world is dead, cold and unending,
and he has never yet seen a God, nor brought to light the existence of
such from empirical necessity. On the contrary, there was need of a
phantastic, indestructible optimism, and one far removed from all sense
of reality, in order, for example, to discover in the shameful death of
Christ really the highest salvation and the redemption of the world.


Thus one can indeed withhold from a child the substance of earlier myths

but not take from him the need for mythology. One can say, that should


it happen that all traditions in the world were cut off with a single

blow, then with the succeeding generation, the whole mythology and
history of religion would start over again. Only a few individuals


succeed in throwing off mythology in a time of a certain intellectual

supremacy—the mass never frees itself. Explanations are of no avail;
they merely destroy a transitory form of manifestation, but not the
creating impulse.

Let us again take up our earlier train of thought.

We spoke of the ontogenetic re-echo of the phylogenetic psychology among
children, we saw that phantastic thinking is a characteristic of
antiquity, of the child, and of the lower races; but now we know also


that our modern and adult man is given over in large part to this same

phantastic thinking, which enters as soon as the directed thinking
ceases. A lessening of the interest, a slight fatigue, is sufficient to
put an end to the directed thinking, the exact psychological adaptation
to the real world, and to replace it with phantasies. We digress from
the theme and give way to our own trains of thought; if the slackening
of the attention increases, then we lose by degrees the consciousness of
the present, and the phantasy enters into possession of the field.

Here the important question obtrudes itself: How are phantasies created?
From the poets we learn much about it; from science we learn little. The
psychoanalytic method, presented to science by Freud, shed light upon
this for the first time. It showed us that there are typical cycles. The
stutterer imagines he is a great orator. The truth of this, Demosthenes,
thanks to his energy, has proven. The poor man imagines himself to be a
millionaire, the child an adult. The conquered fight out victorious
battles with the conquerer; the unfit torments or delights himself with
ambitious plans. We imagine that which we lack. The interesting question
of the “why” of all this we must here leave unanswered, while we return
to the historic problem: From what source do the phantasies draw their
materials?[41] We chose, as an example, a typical phantasy of puberty. A


child in that stage before whom the whole frightening uncertainty of the

future fate opens, puts back the uncertainty into the past, through his
phantasy, and says, “If only I were not the child of my ordinary
parents, but the child of a rich and fashionable count, and had been
merely passed over to my parents, then some day a golden coach would
come, and the count would take his child back with him to his wonderful
castle,” and so it goes on, as in Grimm’s Fairy Tales which the mother
tells to her children.[42] With a normal child, it stops with the
fugitive, quickly-passing idea which is soon covered over and forgotten.
However, at one time, and that was in the ancient world of culture, the
phantasy was an openly acknowledged institution. The heroes,—I recall
Romulus and Remus, Semiramis, Moses and many others,—have been separated
from their real parents.[43] Others are directly sons of gods, and the
noble races derive their family trees from heroes and gods. As one sees
by this example, the phantasy of modern humanity is nothing but a
re-echo of an old-folk-belief, which was very widespread originally.[44]
The ambitious phantasy chooses, among others, a form which is classic,
and which once had a true meaning. The same thing holds good in regard
to the sexual phantasy. In the preamble we have spoken of dreams of
sexual assault: the robber who breaks into the house and commits a
dangerous act. That, too, is a mythological theme, and in the
prehistoric era was certainly a reality too.[45] Wholly apart from the


fact that the capture of women was something general in the lawless

prehistoric times, it was also a subject of mythology in cultivated
epochs. I recall the capture of Proserpina, Deianira, Europa, the Sabine
women, etc. We must not forget that, even to-day, marriage customs exist


in various regions which recall the ancient custom of marriage by

capture.


The symbolism of the instrument of coitus was an inexhaustible material

for ancient phantasy. It furnished a widespread cult that was designated
phallic, the object of reverence of which was the phallus. The companion
of Dionysus was Phales, a personification of the phallus proceeding from
the phallic Herme of Dionysus. The phallic symbols were countless. Among
the Sabines, the custom existed for the bridegroom to part the bride’s
hair with a lance. The bird, the fish and the snake were phallic
symbols. In addition, there existed in enormous quantities theriomorphic
representations of the sexual instinct, in connection with which the
bull, the he-goat, the ram, the boar and the ass were frequently used.


An undercurrent to this choice of symbol was furnished by the sodomitic

inclination of humanity. When in the dream phantasy of modern man, the
feared man is replaced by an animal, there is recurring in the
ontogenetic re-echo the same thing which was openly represented by the
ancients countless times. There were he-goats which pursued nymphs,
satyrs with she-goats; in still older times in Egypt there even existed
a shrine of a goat god, which the Greeks called Pan, where the
Hierodules prostituted themselves with goats.[46] It is well known that
this worship has not died out, but continues to live as a special custom
in South Italy and Greece.[47]

To-day we feel for such a thing nothing but the deepest abhorrence, and
never would admit it still slumbered in our souls. Nevertheless, just as
truly as the idea of the sexual assault is there, so are these things
there too; which we should contemplate still more closely,—not through
moral eye-glasses, with horror, but with interest as a natural science,
since these things are venerable relics of past culture periods. We
have, even to-day, a clause in our penal code against sodomy. But that


which was once so strong as to give rise to a worship among a highly


developed people has probably not wholly disappeared from the human soul

during the course of a few generations. We may not forget that since the
symposium of Plato, in which homo-sexuality faces us on the same level
with the so-called “normal sexuality,” only eighty generations have
passed. And what are eighty generations? They shrink to an imperceptible


period of time when compared with the space of time which separates us

from the homo-Neandertalensis or Heidelbergensis. I might call to mind,
in this connection, some choice thoughts of the great historian
Guglielmo Ferrero:[48]

  “It is a very common belief that the further man is separated from the
  present by time, the more does he differ from us in his thoughts and
  feelings; that the psychology of humanity changes from century to
  century, like fashions of literature. Therefore, no sooner do we find
  in past history an institution, a custom, a law or a belief a little
  different from those with which we are familiar, than we immediately
  search for some complex meanings, which frequently resolve themselves
  into phrases of doubtful significance.

  “Indeed, man does not change so quickly; his psychology at bottom
  remains the same, and even if his culture varies much from one epoch
  to another, it does not change the functioning of his mind. The
  fundamental laws of the mind remain the same, at least during the
  short historical period of which we have knowledge, and all phenomena,
  even the most strange, must be capable of explanation by those common
  laws of the mind which we can recognize in ourselves.”


The psychologist should accept this viewpoint without reservation as

peculiarly applicable to himself. To-day, indeed, in our civilization
the phallic processions, the Dionysian mysteries of classical Athens,
the barefaced Phallic emblems, have disappeared from our coins, houses,
temples and streets; so also have the theriomorphic representations of
the Deity been reduced to small remnants, like the Dove of the Holy
Ghost, the Lamb of God and the Cock of Peter adorning our church towers.
In the same way, the capture and violation of women have shrunken away
to crimes. Yet all of this does not affect the fact that we, in
childhood, go through a period in which the impulses toward these
archaic inclinations appear again and again, and that through all our
life we possess, side by side with the newly recruited, directed and
adapted thought, a phantastic thought which corresponds to the thought
of the centuries of antiquity and barbarism. Just as our bodies still
keep the reminders of old functions and conditions in many old-fashioned
organs, so our minds, too, which apparently have outgrown those archaic
tendencies, nevertheless bear the marks of the evolution passed through,
and the very ancient re-echoes, at least dreamily, in phantasies.

The symbolism which Freud has discovered, is revealed as an expression
of a thinking and of an impulse limited to the dream, to wrong conduct,
and to derangements of the mind, which form of thinking and impulse at
one time ruled as the mightiest influence in past culture epochs.

The question of _whence_ comes the inclination and ability which enables
the mind to express itself symbolically, brings us to the distinction
between the two kinds of thinking—the directed and adapted on one hand,
and the subjective, fed by our own egotistic wishes, on the other. The
latter form of thinking, presupposing that it were not constantly
corrected by the adapted thinking, must necessarily produce an
overwhelmingly subjectively distorted idea of the world. We regard this
state of mind as infantile. It lies in our individual past, and in the
past of mankind.


With this we affirm the important fact that man in his phantastic


thinking has kept a condensation of the psychic history of his