psychology rested, regarding the etiology of the neurosis, and the
tendencies underlying normal human mechanisms, when Dr. Carl Jung, the
most prominent of Freud’s disciples, and the leader of the Zurich
school, found himself no longer able to agree with Freud’s findings in
certain particulars, although the phenomena which Freud observed and the


technique of psychoanalysis developed by Freud were the material on

which Jung worked and the value of which he clearly emphasizes. The


differences which have developed lay in his understanding and

interpretation of the phenomena observed.


Beginning with the conception of libido itself as a term used to connote

sexual hunger and craving, albeit the meaning of the word sexual was


extended by Freud to embrace a much wider significance than common usage

has assigned it, Jung was unable to confine himself to this limitation.
He conceived this longing, this urge or push of life as something
extending beyond sexuality even in its wider sense. He saw in the term
libido a concept of unknown nature, comparable to Bergson’s élan vital,
a hypothetical energy of life, which occupies itself not only in


sexuality but in various physiological and psychological manifestations

such as growth, development, hunger, and all the human activities and
interests. This cosmic energy or urge manifested in the human being he
calls libido and compares it with the energy of physics. Although
recognizing, in common with Freud as well as with many others, the


primal instinct of reproduction as the basis of many functions and

present-day activities of mankind no longer sexual in character he
repudiates the idea of still calling them sexual, even though their
development was a growth originally out of the sexual. Sexuality and its


various manifestations Jung sees as most important channels occupied by

libido, but not the exclusive ones through which libido flows.

This is an energic concept of life; and from this viewpoint this


hypothetical energy of life or libido is a living power used

instinctively by man in all the automatic processes of his functioning;
such very processes being but different manifestations of this energy.
By virtue of its quality of mobility and change man, through his
understanding and intelligence, has the power consciously to direct and
use his libido in definite and desired ways.

In this conception of Jung will be seen an analogy to Bergson, who
speaks of “this change, this movement and becoming, this self-creation,
call it what you will, as the very stuff and reality of our being.”[2]


In developing the energic conception of libido and separating it from

Freud’s sexual definition, Jung makes possible the explanation of
interest in general, and provides a working concept by which not only
the specifically sexual, but the general activities and reactions of man
can be understood.


If a person complains of no longer having interest in his work or of

losing interest in his surroundings, then one understands that his


libido is withdrawn from this object and that in consequence the object

itself seems no longer attractive, whereas, as a matter of fact, the
object itself is exactly the same as formerly. In other words, it is the


libido that we bestow upon an object that makes it attractive and

interesting.


The causes for the withdrawal of libido may be various and are usually

quite different from those that the persons offer in explanation. It is
the task of psychoanalysis to discover the real reasons, which are
usually hidden and unknown. On the other hand, when an individual
exhibits an exaggerated interest or places an over-emphasis upon an idea
or situation, then we know there is too much libido here and that we may
find as a consequence a corresponding depletion elsewhere.

This leads directly into the second point of difference between Jung’s
views and those of Freud. This is concerned with those practically


universal childish manifestations of sexuality called by Freud

“polymorphous perverse” because of their similarity to those


abnormalities of sexuality which occur in adults and are called

perversions.

Jung takes exception to this viewpoint. He sees in the various


manifestations of childhood the precursors or forerunners of the later

fully developed sexuality, and instead of considering them perverse he
considers them preliminary expressions of sexual coloring. He divides
human life into three stages. The first stage up to about the third or
fourth year, generally speaking, he calls the presexual stage, for there


he sees the libido or life energy occupied chiefly in the functions of

nutrition and growth, and he draws an analogy between this period and
that of the caterpillar stage of the butterfly.

The second stage includes the years from this time until puberty, and
this he speaks of as the prepubertal stage.


The third period is that from puberty onward and can be considered the

time of maturity.

It is in the earliest stage, the period of which varies greatly in
different individuals, that are fully inaugurated those various


manifestations which have so marked a sexual coloring that there can be

no question of their relationship, although at that time sexuality in
the adult meaning of the word does not exist.


Jung explains the polymorphism of these phenomena as arising from a


gradual movement of the libido from exclusive service in the function of


nutrition into new avenues which successively open up with the


development of the child until the final inauguration of the sexual

function proper at puberty. Normally these childish bad habits are


gradually relinquished until the libido is entirely withdrawn from these


immature phases and with the ushering in of puberty for the first time

“appears in the form of an undifferentiated sexual primitive power,
clearly forcing the individual towards division, budding, etc.”

However, if in the course of its movement from the function of nutrition
to the sexual function the libido is arrested or retarded at any phase,
then a _fixation_ may result, creating a disturbance in the harmony of
the normal development. For, although the libido is retarded and remains
clinging to some childish manifestation, time goes on and the physical
growth of the child does not stand still. Soon a great contrast is


created between the infantile manifestations of the emotional life and

the needs of the more adult individual, and the foundation is thus


prepared for either the development of a definite neurosis or else for


those weaknesses of character or symptomatic disturbances which are not

sufficiently serious to be called a neurosis.


One of the most active and important forms of childish libido occupation

is in phantasy making. The child’s world is one of imagery and
make-believe where he can create for himself that satisfaction and
enjoyment which the world of reality so often denies. As the child grows


and real demands of life are made upon him it becomes increasingly


necessary that his libido be taken away from his phantastic world and


used for the required adaptation to reality needed by his age and

condition, until finally for the adult the freedom of the whole libido
is necessary to meet the biological and cultural demands of life.

Instead of thus employing the libido in the real world, however, certain


people never relinquish the seeking for satisfaction in the shadowy


world of phantasy and even though they make certain attempts at


adaptation they are halted and discouraged by every difficulty and


obstacle in the path of life and are easily pulled back into their inner

psychic world. This condition is called a state of _introversion_. It is
concerned with the past and the reminiscences which belong thereto.


Situations and experiences which should have been completed and finished

long ago are still dwelt upon and lived with. Images and matters which


were once important but which normally have no significance for their

later age are still actively influencing their present lives. The nature
and character of these phantasy products are legion, and are easily
recognized in the emotional attitudes and pretensions, the childish
illusions and exaggerations, the prejudices and inconsistencies which
people express in manifold forms. The actual situation is inadequately
faced; small matters are reacted towards in an exaggerated manner; or


else a frivolous attitude is maintained where real seriousness is

demanded. In other words, there is clearly manifested an inadequate


psychic adaptation towards reality which is quite to be expected from

the child, but which is very discordant in the adult.

The most important of these past influences is that of the parents.
Because they are the first objects of the developing childish love, and
afford the first satisfaction and pleasure to the child, they become the
models for all succeeding efforts, as Freud has worked out. This he
called the _nuclear_ or _root complex_ because this influence was so


powerful it seemed to be the determining factor in all later

difficulties in the life of the individual.


In this phase of the problem lies the third great difference between

Jung’s interpretation of the observed phenomena and that of Freud.


Jung definitely recognizes that there are many neurotic persons who


clearly exhibited in their childhood the same neurotic tendencies that

are later exaggerated. Also that an almost overwhelming effect on the
destiny of these children is exercised by the influence of the parents,
the frequent over-anxiety or tenderness, the lack of sympathy or
understanding, in other words, the complexes of the parent reacting upon
the child and producing in him love, admiration, fear, distrust, hate,
revolt. The greater the sensitiveness and impressionability of the
child, the more he will be stamped with the familial environment, and


the more he will unconsciously seek to find again in the world of


reality the model of his own small world with all the pleasures and

satisfactions, or disappointments and unhappinesses with which it was
filled.

This condition to be sure is not a recognized or a conscious one, for


the individual may think himself perfectly free from this past influence

because he is living in the real world, and because actually there is a


great difference between the present conditions and that of his childish

past. He sees all this, intellectually, but there is a wide gap between
the intellectual grasp of a situation and the emotional development, and
it is the latter realm wherein lies the disharmony. However, although
many ideas and feelings are connected with the parents, analysis reveals


very often that they are only subjective and that in reality they bear

little resemblance to the actual past situation. Therefore, Jung speaks


no longer of the real father and mother but uses the term imago or image

to represent the father or mother, because the feelings and phantasies


frequently do not deal with the real parents but with the distorted and

subjective image created by the imagination of the individual.


Following this distinction Jung sees in the Oedipus complex of Freud

only a symbol for the “childish desire towards the parents and for the
conflict which this craving evokes,” and cannot accept the theory that


in this early stage of childhood the mother has any real sexual

significance for the child.

The demands of the child upon the mother, the jealousy so often
exhibited, are at first connected with the rôle of the mother as
protector, caretaker and supplier of nutritive wants, and only later,
with the germinating eroticism, does the child’s love become admixed
with the developing sexual quality. The chief love objects are still the


parents and he naturally continues to seek and to find in them

satisfaction for all his desires. In this way the typical conflict is


developed which in the son is directed towards the father and in the

daughter towards the mother. This jealousy of the daughter towards the
mother is called the _Electra complex_ from the myth of Electra who took


revenge on her mother for the murder of the husband because she was in

this way deprived of her father.


Normally as puberty is attained the child gradually becomes more or less

freed from his parents, and upon the degree in which this is
accomplished depends his health and future well-being.


This demand of nature upon the young individual to free himself from the


bonds of his childish dependency and to find in the world of reality his


independent existence is so imperious and dominating that it frequently

produces in the child the greatest struggles and severest conflicts, the
period being characterized symbolically as a _self-sacrifice_ by Jung.


It frequently happens that the young person is so closely bound in the


family relations that it is only with the greatest difficulty that he

can attain any measure of freedom and then only very imperfectly, so


that the libido sexualis can only express itself in certain feelings and


phantasies which clearly reveal the existence of the complex until then

entirely hidden and unrealized. Now commences the secondary struggle


against the unfilial and immoral feelings with a consequent development

of intense resistances expressing themselves in irritation, anger,
revolt and antagonism against the parents, or else in an especially
tender, submissive and yielding attitude which over-compensates for the
rebellion and reaction held within.


This struggle and conflict gives rise to the unconscious phantasy of

self-sacrifice which really means the sacrificing of the childish
tendencies and love type in order to free libido; for his nature demands


that he attain the capacity for the accomplishment of his own personal

fulfilment, the satisfaction of which belongs to the developed man and
woman.


This conception has been worked out in detail by Jung in the book which

is herein presented to English readers.

We now come to the most important of Jung’s conceptions in that it bears


practically upon the treatment of certain types of the neuroses and

stands theoretically in direct opposition to Freud’s hypothesis. While


recognizing fully the influence of the parents and of the sexual

constitution of the child, Jung refuses to see in this infantile past
the real cause for the later development of the illness. He definitely
places the cause of the pathogenic conflict _in the present moment_ and


considers that in seeking for the cause in the distant past one is only

following the desire of the patient, which is to withdraw himself as
much as possible from the present important period.


The conflict is produced by some important task or duty which is