smile when one indiscreetly reckoned the comfortable matronly age of

Penelope and the age of Jocasta, and comically compared the result of
the reckoning with the tragic-erotic struggles in the legend and drama.
We did not know at that time (and who knows even to-day?) that the
mother can be the all-consuming passion of the son, which perhaps
undermines his whole life and tragically destroys it, so that not even
the magnitude of the Oedipus Fate seems one jot overdrawn. Rare and
pathologically understood cases like Ninon de Lenclos and her son[4] lie
too far removed from most of us to give a living impression. But when we
follow the paths traced out by Freud, we arrive at a recognition of the
present existence of such possibilities, which, although they are too
weak to enforce incest, are still strong enough to cause disturbances of
considerable magnitude in the soul. The admission of such possibilities
to one’s self does not occur without a great burst of moral revulsion.
Resistances arise which only too easily dazzle the intellect, and,
through that, make knowledge of self impossible. Whenever we succeed,
however, in stripping feelings from more scientific knowledge, then that
abyss which separates our age from the antique is bridged, and, with
astonishment, we see that Oedipus is still a living thing for us. The
importance of such an impression should not be undervalued. We are


taught by this insight that there is an identity of elementary human

conflicts existing independent of time and place. That which affected
the Greeks with horror still remains true, but it is true for us only
when we give up a vain illusion that we are different—that is to say,
more moral, than the ancients. We of the present day have nearly


succeeded in forgetting that an indissoluble common bond binds us to the

people of antiquity. With this truth a path is opened to the
understanding of the ancient mind; an understanding which so far has not
existed, and, on one side, leads to an inner sympathy, and, on the other
side, to an intellectual comprehension. Through buried strata of the


individual soul we come indirectly into possession of the living mind of

the ancient culture, and, just precisely through that, do we win that
stable point of view outside our own culture, from which, for the first
time, an objective understanding of their mechanisms would be possible.


At least that is the hope which we get from the rediscovery of the

Oedipus problem.

The enquiry made possible by Freud’s work has already resulted
fruitfully; we are indebted to this stimulation for some bold attacks
upon the territory of the history of the human mind. There are the works
of Riklin,[5] Abraham,[6] Rank,[7] Maeder,[8] Jones,[9]—recently


Silberer has joined their ranks with a beautiful investigation entitled

“Phantasie und Mythus.”[10] We are indebted to Pfister[11] for a
comprehensive work which cannot be overlooked here, and which is of much
importance for Christian religious psychology. The leading purpose of


these works is the unlocking of historical problems through the

application of psychoanalytic knowledge; that is to say, knowledge drawn


from the activity of the modern unconscious mind concerning specific

historical material.

I must refer the reader entirely to the specified works, in order that


he may gain information concerning the extent and the kind of insight

which has already been obtained. The explanations are in many cases
dubious in particulars; nevertheless, this detracts in no way from the
total result. It would be significant enough if only the far-reaching


analogy between the psychologic structure of the historical relics and


the structure of the recent individual psychologic products alone were

demonstrated. This proof is possible of attainment for every intelligent
person through the work done up to this time. The analogy prevails
especially in symbolism, as Riklin, Rank, Maeder, and Abraham have
pointed out with illuminating examples; it is also shown in the
individual mechanisms of unconscious work, that is to say in repression,
condensation, etc., as Abraham explicitly shows.


Up to the present time the psychoanalytic investigator has turned his

interest chiefly to the analysis of the individual psychologic problems.
It seems to me, however, that in the present state of affairs there is a


more or less imperative demand for the psychoanalyst to broaden the


analysis of the individual problems by a comparative study of historical

material relating to them, just as Freud has already done in a masterly
manner in his book on “Leonardo da Vinci.”[12] For, just as the


psychoanalytic conceptions promote understanding of the historic

psychologic creations, so reversedly historical materials can shed new
light upon individual psychologic problems. These and similar


considerations have caused me to turn my attention somewhat more to the

historical, in the hope that, out of this, new insight into the
foundations of individual psychology might be won.


                               CHAPTER I


                  CONCERNING THE TWO KINDS OF THINKING

It is a well-known fact that one of the principles of analytic
psychology is that the dream images are to be understood symbolically;
that is to say, that they are not to be taken literally just as they are
presented in sleep, but that behind them a hidden meaning has to be
surmised. It is this ancient idea of a dream symbolism which has
challenged not only criticism, but, in addition to that, the strongest
opposition. That dreams may be full of import, and, therefore, something
to be interpreted, is certainly neither a strange nor an extraordinary
idea. This has been familiar to mankind for thousands of years, and,
therefore, seems much like a banal truth. The dream interpretations of
the Egyptians and Chaldeans, and the story of Joseph who interpreted
Pharaoh’s dreams, are known to every one, and the dream book of
Artemidorus is also familiar. From countless inscribed monuments of all
times and peoples we learn of foreboding dreams, of significant, of
prophetic and also of curative dreams which the Deity sent to the sick,
sleeping in the temple. We know the dream of the mother of Augustus, who
dreamt she was to be with child by the Deity transformed into a snake.


We will not heap up references and examples to bear witness to the

existence of a belief in the symbolism of dreams. When an idea is so
old, and is so generally believed, it is probably true in some way, and,
indeed, as is mostly the case, _is not literally true, but is true
psychologically_. In this distinction lies the reason why the old fogies


of science have from time to time thrown away an inherited piece of

ancient truth; because it was not literal but psychologic truth. For


such discrimination this type of person has at no time had any

comprehension.

From our experience, it is hardly conceivable that a God existing
outside of ourselves causes dreams, or that the dream, eo ipso, foresees
the future prophetically. When we translate this into the psychologic,
however, then the ancient theories sound much more reconcilable, namely,
_the dream arises from a part of the mind unknown to us, but none the
less important, and is concerned with the desires for the approaching
day_. This psychologic formula derived from the ancient superstitious
conception of dreams, is, so to speak, exactly identified with the
Freudian psychology, which assumes a rising wish from the unconscious to
be the source of the dream.

As the old belief teaches, the Deity or the Demon speaks in symbolic
speech to the sleeper, and the dream interpreter has the riddle to
solve. In modern speech we say this means that the dream is a _series of
images, which are apparently contradictory and nonsensical, but arise in
reality from psychologic material which yields a clear meaning_.

Were I to suppose among my readers a far-reaching ignorance of dream
analysis, then I should be obliged to illustrate this statement with
numerous examples. To-day, however, these things are quite well known,
so that one must proceed carefully with every-day dream material, out of
consideration for a public educated in these matters. It is a special


inconvenience that no dream can be recounted without being obliged to

add to it half a life’s history which affords the individual foundations
of the dream, but there are some few typical dreams which can be told
without too great a ballast. One of these is the dream of the sexual
assault, which is especially prevalent among women. A girl sleeping
after an evening happily spent in dancing, dreams that a robber breaks
open her door noisily and stabs through her body with a lance. This
theme, which explains itself, has countless variations, some simple,
some complicated. Instead of the lance it is a sword, a dagger, a
revolver, a gun, a cannon, a hydrant, a watering pot; or the assault is
a burglary, a pursuit, a robbery, or it is some one hidden in the closet
or under the bed. Or the danger may be illustrated by wild animals; for
instance, a horse which throws the dreamer to the ground and kicks her
in the body with his hind foot; lions, tigers, elephants with
threatening trunks, and finally snakes in endless variety. Sometimes the
snake creeps into the mouth, sometimes it bites the breast like
Cleopatra’s legendary asp, sometimes it comes in the rôle of the
paradisical snake, or in the variations of Franz Stuck, whose pictures
of snakes bear the significant titles “Vice,” “Sin,” “Lust.” The mixture


of lust and anxiety is expressed incomparably in the very atmosphere of

these pictures, and far more brutally, indeed, than in Mörike’s charming
poem.

                  _The Maiden’s First Love Song_

                    What’s in the net?
                        Behold,
                    But I am afraid,
                    Do I grasp a sweet eel,
                    Do I seize a snake?


                        Love is a blind

                        Fisherwoman;


                        Tell the child

                        Where to seize.
                    Already it leaps in my hands.

                    Oh, Pity, or delight!


                    With nestlings and turnings

                        It coils on my breast,
                        It bites me, oh, wonder!
                        Boldly through the skin,
                        It darts under my heart.
                    Oh, Love, I shudder!

                    What can I do, what can I begin?
                        That shuddering thing;


                        There it crackles within

                        And coils in a ring.
                        It must be poisoned.
                        Here it crawls around.


                        Blissfully I feel as it worms


                        Itself into my soul

                        And kills me finally.

All these things are simple, and need no explanation to be intelligible.
Somewhat more complicated, but still unmistakable, is the dream of a
woman; she sees the triumphal arch of Constantine. A cannon stands
before it, to the right of it a bird, to the left a man. A shot flashes
out of the tube; the projectile hits her; it goes into her pocket, into
her purse. There it remains, and she holds her purse as if something
very precious were in it. The image disappears, and she continues to see
only the stock of the cannon, and over that Constantine’s motto, “In hoc
signo vinces.”


These few references to the symbolic nature of dreams are perhaps

sufficient. For whomsoever the proof may appear insufficient, and it is
certainly insufficient for a beginner, further evidence may be found in
the fundamental work of Freud, and in the works of Stekel and Rank which
are fuller in certain particulars. We must assume here that the dream
symbolism is an established fact, in order to bring to our study a mind
suitably prepared for an appreciation of this work. We would not be
successful if we, on the contrary, were to be astonished at the idea


that an intellectual image can be projected into our conscious psychic