                               CHAPTER II


                         THE MILLER PHANTASIES



We know, from much psychoanalytic experience, that whenever one recounts
his phantasies or his dreams, he deals not only with the most important
and intimate of his problems, but with the one the most painful at that
moment.[57]

Since in the case of Miss Miller we have to do with a complicated
system, we must give our attention carefully to the particulars which I
will discuss, following as best I can Miss Miller’s presentation.

In the first chapter, “Phénomènes de suggestion passagère ou
d’autosuggestion instantanée,” Miss Miller gives a list of examples of
her unusual suggestibility, which she herself considers as a symptom of
her nervous temperament; for example, she is excessively fond of caviar,
whereas some of her relatives loathe it. However, as soon as any one
expresses his loathing, she herself feels momentarily the same loathing.
I do not need to emphasize especially the fact that such examples are
very important in individual psychology; that caviar is a food for which
nervous women frequently have an especial predilection, is a fact well
known to the psychoanalyst.

Miss Miller has an extraordinary faculty for taking other people’s
feelings upon herself, and of identification; for example, she
identifies herself to such a degree in “Cyrano” with the wounded
Christian de Neuvillette, that she feels in her own breast a truly
piercing pain at that place where Christian received the deadly blow.

From the viewpoint of analytic psychology, the theatre, aside from any
esthetic value, may be considered as an institution for the treatment of
the mass complex. The enjoyment of the comedy, or of the dramatic plot
ending happily is produced by an unreserved identification of one’s own
complexes with the play. The enjoyment of tragedy lies in the thrilling
yet satisfactory feeling that something which might occur to one’s self
is happening to another. The sympathy of our author with the dying
Christian means that there is in her a complex awaiting a similar
solution, which whispers softly to her “hodie tibi, cras mihi,” and that
one may know exactly what is considered the effectual moment Miss Miller
adds that she felt a pain in her breast, “Lorsque Sarah Bernhardt se
précipite sur lui pour étancher le sang de sa blessure.” Therefore the
effectual moment is when the love between Christian and Roxane comes to
a sudden end.

If we glance over the whole of Rostand’s play, we come upon certain
moments, the effect of which one cannot easily escape and which we will
emphasize here because they have meaning for all that follows. Cyrano de
Bergerac, with the long ugly nose, on account of which he undertakes
countless duels, loves Roxane, who, for her part unaware of it, loves
Christian, because of the beautiful verses which really originate from
Cyrano’s pen, but which apparently come from Christian. Cyrano is the
misunderstood one, whose passionate love and noble soul no one suspects;
the hero who sacrifices himself for others, and, dying, just in the
evening of life, reads to her once more Christian’s last letter, the
verses which he himself had composed.

           “Roxane, adieu, je vais mourir!
           C’est pour ce soir, je crois, ma bien-aimée!
           J’ai l’âme lourde encore d’amour inexprimé.
           Et je meurs! Jamais plus, jamais mes yeux grisés,
           Mes regards dont c’était les frémissantes fêtes,
           Ne baiseront au vol les gestes que vous faites;
           J’en revois un petit qui vous est familier
           Pour toucher votre front et je voudrais crier—.
                 Et je crie:
           Adieu!—Ma chère, ma chérie,
           Mon trésor—mon amour!
           Mon coeur ne vous quitta jamais une seconde,
           Et je suis et je serai jusque dans l’autre monde
           Celui qui vous aime sans mesure, celui—”

Whereupon Roxane recognizes in him the real loved one. It is already too
late; death comes; and in agonized delirium, Cyrano raises himself, and
draws his sword:

               “Je crois, qu’elle regarde....
               Qu’elle ose regarder mon nez, la camarde!

                          (Il lève son épée.)

        Que dites-vous?... C’est inutile!
              Je le sais!
        Mais on ne se bat pas dans l’espoir du succès!
        Non! Non! C’est bien plus beau, lorsque c’est inutile!
        —Qu’est-ce que c’est que tous ceux-là?—Vous êtes mille?
        Ah! je vous reconnais, tous mes vieux ennemis!
        Le mensonge!

                    (Il frappe de son épée le vide.)

                  Tiens, tiens, ha! ha! les Compromis,
                  Les Préjugés, les Lâchetés!...

                              (Il frappe.)

               Que je pactise?
         Jamais, jamais!—Ah, te voilà, toi, la Sottise!
         —Je sais bien qu’à la fin vous me mettrez à bas;
         N’importe: je me bats! je me bats! je me bats!
         Oui, vous m’arrachez tout, le laurier et la rose!
         Arrachez! Il y a malgré vous quelque chose
         Que j’emporte, et ce soir, quand j’entrerai chez Dieu,
         Mon salut balaiera largement le seuil bleu.
         Quelque chose que sans un pli, sans une tache,
         J’emporte malgré vous, et c’est—mon panache.”

Cyrano, who under the hateful exterior of his body hid a soul so much
more beautiful, is a yearner and one misunderstood, and his last triumph
is that he departs, at least, with a clean shield—“Sans un pli et sans
une tache.” The identification of the author with the dying Christian,
who in himself is a figure but little impressive and sympathetic,
expresses clearly that a sudden end is destined for her love just as for
Christian’s love. The tragic intermezzo with Christian, however, is
played as we have seen upon a background of much wider significance,
viz., the misunderstood love of Cyrano for Roxane. Therefore, the
identification with Christian has only the significance of a substitute
memory (“deckerinnerung”), and is really intended for Cyrano. That this
is just what we might expect will be seen in the further course of our
analysis.

Besides this story of identification with Christian, there follows as a
further example an extraordinarily plastic memory of the sea, evoked by
the sight of a photograph of a steamboat on the high seas. (“Je sentis
les pulsations des machines, le soulèvement des vagues, le balancement
du navire.”)

We may mention here the supposition that there are connected with sea
journeys particularly impressive and strong memories which penetrate
deeply into the soul and give an especially strong character to the
surface memories through unconscious harmony. To what extent the
memories assumed here agree with the above mentioned problem we shall
see in the following pages.

This example, following at this time, is singular: Once, while in
bathing, Miss Miller wound a towel around her hair, in order to protect
it from a wetting. At the same moment she had the following strong
impression:

  “Il me sembla que j’étais sur un piédestal, une véritable statue
  égyptienne, avec tous ses détails: membres raides, un pied en avant,
  la main tenant des insignes,” and so on.

Miss Miller identified herself, therefore, with an Egyptian statue, and
naturally the foundation for this was a subjective pretension. That is
to say, “I am like an Egyptian statue, just as stiff, wooden, sublime
and impassive,” qualities for which the Egyptian statue is proverbial.
One does not make such an assertion to one’s self without an inner
compulsion, and the correct formula might just as well be, “as stiff,
wooden, etc., as an Egyptian statue I might indeed be.” The sight of
one’s own unclothed body in a bath has undeniable effects for the
phantasy, which can be set at rest by the above formula.[58]

The example which follows this, emphasizes the author’s personal
influence upon an artist:

  “J’ai réussi à lui faire rendre des paysages, comme ceux du lac Léman,
  où il n’a jamais été, et il prétendait que je pouvais lui faire rendre
  des choses qu’il n’avait jamais vues, et lui donner la sensation d’une
  atmosphère ambiante qu’il n’avait jamais sentie; bref que je me
  servais de lui comme lui-même se servait de son crayon, c’est à dire
  comme d’un simple instrument.”

This observation stands in abrupt contrast to the phantasy of the
Egyptian statue. Miss Miller had here the unspoken need of emphasizing
her almost magic effect upon another person. This could not have
happened, either, without an unconscious need, which is particularly
felt by one who does not often succeed in making an emotional impression
upon a fellow being.

With that, the list of examples which are to picture Miss Miller’s
autosuggestibility and suggestive effect, is exhausted. In this respect,
the examples are neither especially striking nor interesting. From an
analytical viewpoint, on the contrary, they are much more important,
since they afford us a glance into the soul of the writer. Ferenczi[59]
has taught us in an excellent work what is to be thought about
suggestibility, that is to say, that these phenomena win new aspects in
the light of the Freudian libido theory, in so much as their effects
become clear through “Libido-besetzungen.” This was already indicated
above in the discussion of the examples, and in the greatest detail
regarding the identification with Christian. The identification becomes
effective by its receiving an influx of energy from the strongly
accentuated thought and emotional feeling underlying the Christian
motif. Just the reverse is the suggestive effect of the individual in an
especial capacity for concentrating interest (that is to say, libido)
upon another person, by which the other is unconsciously compelled to
reaction (the same or opposed). The majority of the examples concern
cases where Miss Miller is put under the effects of suggestion; that is
to say, when the libido has spontaneously gained possession of certain
impressions, and this is impossible if the libido is dammed up to an
unusual degree by the lack of application to reality. Miss Miller’s
observations about suggestibility inform us, therefore, of the fact that
the author is pleased to tell us in her following phantasies something
of the history of her love.

                              CHAPTER III


                          THE HYMN OF CREATION
