With further investigations into the nature of the repressed complexes a
very astonishing situation was revealed. The parental influence on
children is something so well recognized and understood that to call
attention to it sounds much like a banality. However, here an
extraordinary discovery was made, for in tracing out the feelings and
emotions of adults it became evident that this influence was paramount
not only for children but for adults as well; that the entire direction
of lives was largely determined quite unconsciously by the parental
associations, and that, although adults, the emotional side of their
nature was still infantile in type and demanded unconsciously the
infantile or childish relations.

Freud traces out the commencement of the infantile attachment for the
parents in this wise.

In the beginning the child derives its first satisfaction and pleasure
from the mother in the form of nutrition and care for its wants. In this
first act of suckling Freud sees already a kind of sexual pleasure, for
he apparently identifies the pleasure principle and the sexual instinct
and considers that the former is primarily rooted in the latter. At this
early time commence such various infantile actions unconnected with
nutrition as thumbsucking, various movements of the body as rubbing,
boring, pulling and other manifestations of a definite interest in its
own body, a delight in nakedness, the pleasure exhibited in inflicting
pain on some object and its opposite, the pleasure from receiving pain.
All of these afford the child pleasure and satisfaction, and because
they seem analogous to certain perversions in adults they are called by
Freud the “polymorphous perverse sexuality” of childhood. The character
of these instinctive actions which have nothing to do with any other
person, and through which the child attains pleasure from its own body,
caused Freud to term this phase of life as autoerotic after Havelock
Ellis. However, with the growth of the child there is a parallel
development of the psychic elements of its sexual nature and now the
mother, the original object of its love, primarily determined by its
helplessness and need, acquires a new valuation. The beginnings of the
need for a love object to satisfy the craving or libido of the child are
early in evidence and, following along sex lines in general, the little
son prefers the mother and the daughter the father after the usual
preference of the parents.

At this early time children feel deeply the enormous importance of their
parents and their entire world is bounded by the family circle. All the
elements of the ego which the child possesses have now become manifest;
love, jealousy, curiosity, hate, etc., and those instincts are directed
in the greatest degree towards the objects of their libido, namely the
parents. With the growing ego of the child there is a development of
strong wishes and desires demanding satisfaction which can only be
gratified by the mother; therefore there is aroused in the small son the
feeling of jealousy and anger towards the father in whom he sees a rival
for the affection of the mother and whom he would like to replace. This
desire in the soul of the child Freud calls the _Oedipus complex_ in
recognition of its analogy to the tragedy of King Oedipus who was drawn
by his fate to kill his father and win his mother for a wife. Freud
presents this as the _nuclear complex_ of every neurosis.

At the basis of this complex, some trace of which can be found in every
person, Freud sees a definite incest wish towards the mother which only
lacks the quality of consciousness. Because of moral reactions this wish
is quickly subjected to repression through the operation of the “incest
barrier,” a postulate he compares to the incest taboo found among
inferior peoples. At this time the child is beginning to develop its
typical sexual curiosity expressed by the question, “Where do I come
from?” The interest and investigation of the child into this problem,
aided by observations and deductions from various actions and attitudes
of the parents, who have no idea of the watchfulness of the child, lead
him, because of his imperfect knowledge and immature development, into
many false theories and ideas of birth. These infantile sexual theories
are held by Freud to be determinative in the development of the child’s
character and also for the contents of the unconscious as expressed in a
future neurosis.

These various reactions of the child and his sexual curiosity are
entirely normal and unavoidable, and if his development proceeds in an
orderly fashion then, at the time of definite object choice he will pass
smoothly over from the limitations of the family attachment out into the
world and find therein his independent existence.

However, if the libido remains fixed on the first chosen object so that
the growing individual is unable to tear himself loose from these
familial ties, then the incestuous bond is deepened with the developing
sexual instinct and its accompanying need of a love object, and the
entire future of the young personality endangered. For with the
development of the incestuous bond the natural repressions deepen
because the moral censor cannot allow these disturbing relations to
become clear to the individual. Therefore, the whole matter is repressed
more deeply into the unconscious, and even a feeling of positive enmity
and repulsion towards the parents is often developed in order to conceal
and over-compensate for the impossible situation actually present.

This persistence of the attachment of the libido to the original object,
and the inability to find in this a suitable satisfaction for the adult
need, interferes with the normal development of the psycho-sexual
character, and it is due to this that the adult retains that
“infantilism of sexuality” which plays so great a rôle in determining
the instability of the emotional life which so frequently leads into the
definite neuroses.


These were the conclusions reached and the ground on which Freudian
psychology rested, regarding the etiology of the neurosis, and the
tendencies underlying normal human mechanisms, when Dr. Carl Jung, the
most prominent of Freud’s disciples, and the leader of the Zurich
school, found himself no longer able to agree with Freud’s findings in
certain particulars, although the phenomena which Freud observed and the
technique of psychoanalysis developed by Freud were the material on
which Jung worked and the value of which he clearly emphasizes. The
differences which have developed lay in his understanding and
interpretation of the phenomena observed.

Beginning with the conception of libido itself as a term used to connote
sexual hunger and craving, albeit the meaning of the word sexual was
extended by Freud to embrace a much wider significance than common usage
has assigned it, Jung was unable to confine himself to this limitation.
He conceived this longing, this urge or push of life as something
extending beyond sexuality even in its wider sense. He saw in the term
libido a concept of unknown nature, comparable to Bergson’s élan vital,
a hypothetical energy of life, which occupies itself not only in
sexuality but in various physiological and psychological manifestations
such as growth, development, hunger, and all the human activities and
interests. This cosmic energy or urge manifested in the human being he
calls libido and compares it with the energy of physics. Although
recognizing, in common with Freud as well as with many others, the
primal instinct of reproduction as the basis of many functions and
present-day activities of mankind no longer sexual in character he
repudiates the idea of still calling them sexual, even though their
development was a growth originally out of the sexual. Sexuality and its
various manifestations Jung sees as most important channels occupied by
libido, but not the exclusive ones through which libido flows.

This is an energic concept of life; and from this viewpoint this
hypothetical energy of life or libido is a living power used
instinctively by man in all the automatic processes of his functioning;
such very processes being but different manifestations of this energy.
By virtue of its quality of mobility and change man, through his
understanding and intelligence, has the power consciously to direct and
use his libido in definite and desired ways.

In this conception of Jung will be seen an analogy to Bergson, who
speaks of “this change, this movement and becoming, this self-creation,
call it what you will, as the very stuff and reality of our being.”[2]

In developing the energic conception of libido and separating it from
Freud’s sexual definition, Jung makes possible the explanation of
interest in general, and provides a working concept by which not only
the specifically sexual, but the general activities and reactions of man
can be understood.

If a person complains of no longer having interest in his work or of
losing interest in his surroundings, then one understands that his
libido is withdrawn from this object and that in consequence the object
itself seems no longer attractive, whereas, as a matter of fact, the
object itself is exactly the same as formerly. In other words, it is the
libido that we bestow upon an object that makes it attractive and
interesting.

The causes for the withdrawal of libido may be various and are usually
quite different from those that the persons offer in explanation. It is
the task of psychoanalysis to discover the real reasons, which are
usually hidden and unknown. On the other hand, when an individual
exhibits an exaggerated interest or places an over-emphasis upon an idea
or situation, then we know there is too much libido here and that we may
find as a consequence a corresponding depletion elsewhere.

This leads directly into the second point of difference between Jung’s
views and those of Freud. This is concerned with those practically
universal childish manifestations of sexuality called by Freud
“polymorphous perverse” because of their similarity to those
abnormalities of sexuality which occur in adults and are called
perversions.

Jung takes exception to this viewpoint. He sees in the various
manifestations of childhood the precursors or forerunners of the later
fully developed sexuality, and instead of considering them perverse he
considers them preliminary expressions of sexual coloring. He divides
human life into three stages. The first stage up to about the third or
fourth year, generally speaking, he calls the presexual stage, for there
he sees the libido or life energy occupied chiefly in the functions of
nutrition and growth, and he draws an analogy between this period and
that of the caterpillar stage of the butterfly.

The second stage includes the years from this time until puberty, and
this he speaks of as the prepubertal stage.

The third period is that from puberty onward and can be considered the
time of maturity.

It is in the earliest stage, the period of which varies greatly in
different individuals, that are fully inaugurated those various
manifestations which have so marked a sexual coloring that there can be
no question of their relationship, although at that time sexuality in
the adult meaning of the word does not exist.

Jung explains the polymorphism of these phenomena as arising from a
gradual movement of the libido from exclusive service in the function of
nutrition into new avenues which successively open up with the
development of the child until the final inauguration of the sexual
function proper at puberty. Normally these childish bad habits are
gradually relinquished until the libido is entirely withdrawn from these
immature phases and with the ushering in of puberty for the first time
“appears in the form of an undifferentiated sexual primitive power,
clearly forcing the individual towards division, budding, etc.”

However, if in the course of its movement from the function of nutrition
to the sexual function the libido is arrested or retarded at any phase,
then a _fixation_ may result, creating a disturbance in the harmony of
the normal development. For, although the libido is retarded and remains
clinging to some childish manifestation, time goes on and the physical
growth of the child does not stand still. Soon a great contrast is
created between the infantile manifestations of the emotional life and
the needs of the more adult individual, and the foundation is thus
prepared for either the development of a definite neurosis or else for
those weaknesses of character or symptomatic disturbances which are not
sufficiently serious to be called a neurosis.

One of the most active and important forms of childish libido occupation
is in phantasy making. The child’s world is one of imagery and
make-believe where he can create for himself that satisfaction and
enjoyment which the world of reality so often denies. As the child grows
and real demands of life are made upon him it becomes increasingly
necessary that his libido be taken away from his phantastic world and
used for the required adaptation to reality needed by his age and
condition, until finally for the adult the freedom of the whole libido
is necessary to meet the biological and cultural demands of life.

Instead of thus employing the libido in the real world, however, certain
people never relinquish the seeking for satisfaction in the shadowy
world of phantasy and even though they make certain attempts at
adaptation they are halted and discouraged by every difficulty and
obstacle in the path of life and are easily pulled back into their inner
psychic world. This condition is called a state of _introversion_. It is
concerned with the past and the reminiscences which belong thereto.
Situations and experiences which should have been completed and finished
long ago are still dwelt upon and lived with. Images and matters which
were once important but which normally have no significance for their
later age are still actively influencing their present lives. The nature
and character of these phantasy products are legion, and are easily
recognized in the emotional attitudes and pretensions, the childish
illusions and exaggerations, the prejudices and inconsistencies which
people express in manifold forms. The actual situation is inadequately
faced; small matters are reacted towards in an exaggerated manner; or
else a frivolous attitude is maintained where real seriousness is
demanded. In other words, there is clearly manifested an inadequate
psychic adaptation towards reality which is quite to be expected from
the child, but which is very discordant in the adult.

The most important of these past influences is that of the parents.
Because they are the first objects of the developing childish love, and
afford the first satisfaction and pleasure to the child, they become the
models for all succeeding efforts, as Freud has worked out. This he
called the _nuclear_ or _root complex_ because this influence was so
powerful it seemed to be the determining factor in all later
difficulties in the life of the individual.

In this phase of the problem lies the third great difference between
Jung’s interpretation of the observed phenomena and that of Freud.

Jung definitely recognizes that there are many neurotic persons who
clearly exhibited in their childhood the same neurotic tendencies that
are later exaggerated. Also that an almost overwhelming effect on the
destiny of these children is exercised by the influence of the parents,
the frequent over-anxiety or tenderness, the lack of sympathy or
understanding, in other words, the complexes of the parent reacting upon
the child and producing in him love, admiration, fear, distrust, hate,
revolt. The greater the sensitiveness and impressionability of the
child, the more he will be stamped with the familial environment, and
the more he will unconsciously seek to find again in the world of
reality the model of his own small world with all the pleasures and
satisfactions, or disappointments and unhappinesses with which it was
filled.

This condition to be sure is not a recognized or a conscious one, for
the individual may think himself perfectly free from this past influence
because he is living in the real world, and because actually there is a
great difference between the present conditions and that of his childish
past. He sees all this, intellectually, but there is a wide gap between
the intellectual grasp of a situation and the emotional development, and
it is the latter realm wherein lies the disharmony. However, although
many ideas and feelings are connected with the parents, analysis reveals
very often that they are only subjective and that in reality they bear
little resemblance to the actual past situation. Therefore, Jung speaks
no longer of the real father and mother but uses the term imago or image
to represent the father or mother, because the feelings and phantasies
frequently do not deal with the real parents but with the distorted and
subjective image created by the imagination of the individual.

Following this distinction Jung sees in the Oedipus complex of Freud
only a symbol for the “childish desire towards the parents and for the
conflict which this craving evokes,” and cannot accept the theory that
in this early stage of childhood the mother has any real sexual
significance for the child.

The demands of the child upon the mother, the jealousy so often
exhibited, are at first connected with the rôle of the mother as
protector, caretaker and supplier of nutritive wants, and only later,
with the germinating eroticism, does the child’s love become admixed
with the developing sexual quality. The chief love objects are still the
parents and he naturally continues to seek and to find in them
satisfaction for all his desires. In this way the typical conflict is
developed which in the son is directed towards the father and in the
daughter towards the mother. This jealousy of the daughter towards the
mother is called the _Electra complex_ from the myth of Electra who took
revenge on her mother for the murder of the husband because she was in
this way deprived of her father.

Normally as puberty is attained the child gradually becomes more or less
freed from his parents, and upon the degree in which this is
accomplished depends his health and future well-being.

This demand of nature upon the young individual to free himself from the
bonds of his childish dependency and to find in the world of reality his
independent existence is so imperious and dominating that it frequently
produces in the child the greatest struggles and severest conflicts, the
period being characterized symbolically as a _self-sacrifice_ by Jung.

It frequently happens that the young person is so closely bound in the
family relations that it is only with the greatest difficulty that he
can attain any measure of freedom and then only very imperfectly, so
that the libido sexualis can only express itself in certain feelings and
phantasies which clearly reveal the existence of the complex until then
entirely hidden and unrealized. Now commences the secondary struggle
against the unfilial and immoral feelings with a consequent development
of intense resistances expressing themselves in irritation, anger,
revolt and antagonism against the parents, or else in an especially
tender, submissive and yielding attitude which over-compensates for the
rebellion and reaction held within.

This struggle and conflict gives rise to the unconscious phantasy of
self-sacrifice which really means the sacrificing of the childish
tendencies and love type in order to free libido; for his nature demands
that he attain the capacity for the accomplishment of his own personal
fulfilment, the satisfaction of which belongs to the developed man and
woman.

This conception has been worked out in detail by Jung in the book which
is herein presented to English readers.

We now come to the most important of Jung’s conceptions in that it bears
practically upon the treatment of certain types of the neuroses and
stands theoretically in direct opposition to Freud’s hypothesis. While
recognizing fully the influence of the parents and of the sexual
constitution of the child, Jung refuses to see in this infantile past
the real cause for the later development of the illness. He definitely
places the cause of the pathogenic conflict _in the present moment_ and
considers that in seeking for the cause in the distant past one is only
following the desire of the patient, which is to withdraw himself as
much as possible from the present important period.

The conflict is produced by some important task or duty which is
essential biologically and practically for the fulfilment of the ego of
the individual, but before which an obstacle arises from which he
shrinks, and thus halted cannot go on. With this interference in the
path of progression libido is stored up and a _regression_ takes place
whereby there occurs a reanimation of past ways of libido occupation
which were entirely normal to the child, but which for the adult are no
longer of value. These regressive infantile desires and phantasies now
alive and striving for satisfaction are converted into symptoms, and in
these surrogate forms obtain a certain gratification, thus creating the
external manifestations of the neurosis. Therefore Jung does not ask
from what psychic experience or point of fixation in childhood the
patient is suffering, but what is the present duty or task he is
avoiding, or what obstacle in his life’s path he is unable to overcome?
What is the cause of his regression to past psychic experiences?

Following this theory Jung expresses the view that the elaborate
phantasies and dreams produced by these patients are really forms of
compensation or artificial substitutes for the unfulfilled adaptation to
reality. The sexual content of these phantasies and dreams is only
apparently and not actually expressive of a real sexual desire or incest
wish, but is a regressive employment of sexual forms to symbolically
express a present-day need when the attainment of the present ego demand
seems too difficult or impossible, and no adaptation is made to what is
possible for the individual’s capability.[3]

With this statement Jung throws a new light on the work of analytic
psychology and on the conception of the neurotic symptoms, and renders
possible of understanding the many apparent incongruities and
conflicting observations which have been so disturbing to the critics.


It now becomes proper to ask what has been established by all this mass
of investigation into the soul, and what is its value not only as a
therapeutic measure for the neurotic sufferer, but also for the normal
human being?

First and perhaps most important is the recognition of a definite
psychological determinism. Instead of human life being filled with
foolish, meaningless or purposeless actions, errors and thoughts, it can
be demonstrated that no expression or manifestation of the psyche,
however trifling or inconsistent in appearance, is really lawless or
unmotivated. Only a possession of the technique is necessary in order to
reveal, to any one desirous of knowing, the existence of the unconscious
determinants of his mannerisms, trivial expressions, acts and behavior,
their purpose and significance.

This leads into the second fundamental conception, which is perhaps even
less considered than the foregoing, and that is the relative value of
the conscious mind and thought. It is the general attitude of people to
judge themselves by their surface motives, to satisfy themselves by
saying or thinking “this is what I want to do or say” or “I intended to
do thus and so,” but somehow what one thought, one intended to say or
expected to do is very often the contrary of what actually is said or
done. Every one has had these experiences when the gap between the
conscious thought and action was gross enough to be observed. It is also
a well known experience to consciously desire something very much and
when it is obtained to discover that this in no wise satisfied or
lessened the desire, which was then transferred to some other object.
Thus one became cognizant of the fact that the feeling and idea
presented by consciousness as the desire was an error. What is the
difficulty in these conditions? Evidently some other directing force
than that of which we are aware is at work.

Dr. G. Stanley Hall uses a very striking symbol when he compares the
mind to an iceberg floating in the ocean with one-eighth visible above
the water and seven-eighths below—the one-eighth above being that part
called conscious and the seven-eighths below that which we call the
unconscious. The influence and controlling power of the unconscious
desires over our thoughts and acts are in this relative proportion.
Faint glimmers of other motives and interests than those we accept or
which we believe, often flit into consciousness. These indications, if
studied or valued accurately, would lead to the realization that
consciousness is but a single stage and but one form of expression of
mind. Therefore its dictum is but one, often untrustworthy, approach to
the great question as to what is man’s actual psychic accomplishment,
and as to what in particular is the actual soul development of the
individual.

A further contribution of equal importance has been the empiric
development of a dynamic theory of life; the conception that life is in
a state of flux—movement—leading either to construction or destruction.
Through the development man has reached he has attained the power by
means of his intelligence and understanding of definitely directing to a
certain extent this life energy or libido into avenues which serve his
interest and bring a real satisfaction for the present day.

When man through ignorance and certain inherent tendencies fails to
recognize his needs or his power to fulfil them, or to adapt himself to
the conditions of reality of the present time, there is then produced
that reanimation of infantile paths by which an attempt is made to gain
fulfilment or satisfaction through the production of symptoms or
attitudes.

The acceptance of these statements demands the recognition of the
existence of an infantile sexuality and the large part played by it in
the later life of the individual. Because of the power and imperious
influence exerted by the parents upon the child, and because of the
unconscious attachment of his libido to the original object, the mother,
and the perseverance of this first love model in the psyche, he finds it
very difficult, on reaching the stage of adult development and the time
for seeking a love object outside of the family, to gain a satisfactory
model.

It is exceedingly important for parents and teachers to recognize the
requirements of nature, which, beginning with puberty, imperiously
demand of the young individual a separation of himself from the parent
stem and the development of an independent existence. In our complex
modern civilization this demand of nature is difficult enough of
achievement for the child who has the heartiest and most intelligent
co-operation of his parents and environment—but for the one who has not
only to contend with his own inner struggle for his freedom but has in
addition the resistance of his parents who would hold him in his
childhood at any cost, because they cannot endure the thought of his
separation from them, the task becomes one of the greatest magnitude. It
is during this period when the struggle between the childish inertia and
nature’s urge becomes so keen, that there occur the striking
manifestations of jealousy, criticism, irritability all usually directed
against the parents, of defiance of parental authority, of runaways and
various other psychic and nervous disorders known to all.

This struggle, which is the first great task of mankind and the one
which requires the greatest effort, is that which is expressed by Jung
as the self-sacrifice motive—the sacrifice of the childish feelings and
demands, and of the irresponsibility of this period, and the assumption
of the duties and tasks of an individual existence.

It is this great theme which Jung sees as the real motive lying hidden
in the myths and religions of man from the beginning, as well as in the
literature and artistic creations of both ancient and modern time, and
which he works out with the greatest wealth of detail and painstaking
effort in the book herewith presented.

This necessitates a recognition and revaluation of the enormous
importance and influence of the ego and the sexual instinct upon the
thought and reaction of man, and also predicates a displacement of the
psychological point of gravity from the will and intellect to the realm
of the emotions and feelings. The desired end is a synthesis of these
two paths or the use of the intellect constructively in the service of
the emotions in order to gain for the best interest of the individual
some sort of co-operative reaction between the two.

No one dealing with analytic psychology can fail to be struck by the
tremendous and unnecessary burdens which man has placed upon himself,
and how greatly he has increased the difficulties of adaptation by his
rigid intellectual views and moral formulas, and by his inability to
admit to himself that he is actually just a human being imperfect, and
containing within himself all manner of tendencies, good and bad, all
striving for some satisfactory goal. Further, that the refusal to see
himself in this light instead of as an ideal person in no way alters the
actual condition, and that in fact, through the cheap pretense of being
able only to consider himself as a very virtuous person, or as shocked
and hurt when observing the “sins” of others, he actually is prevented
from developing his own character and bringing his own capacities to
their fullest expressions.

There is frequently expressed among people the idea of how fortunate it
is that we cannot see each other’s thoughts, and how disturbing it would
be if our real feelings could be read. But what is so shameful in these
secrets of the soul? They are in reality our own egoistic desires all
striving, longing, wishing for satisfaction, for happiness; those
desires which instinctively crave their own gratification but which can
only be really fulfilled by adapting them to the real world and to the
social group.

Why is it that it is so painful for man to admit that the prime
influence in all human endeavor is found in the ego itself, in its
desires, wishes, needs and satisfactions, in short, in its need for
self-expression and self-perpetuation, the evolutionary impetus in life?

The basis for the unpleasantness of this idea may perhaps be found in an
inner resistance in nature itself which forces man to include others in
his scheme, lest his own greedy desires should serve to destroy him. But
even with this inner demand and all the ethical and moral teachings of
centuries it is everywhere evident that man has only very imperfectly
learned that it is to his own interest to consider his neighbor and that
it is impossible for him to ignore the needs of the body social of which
he is a part. Externally, the recognition of the strength of the ego
impulse is objectionable because of the ideal conception that
self-striving and so-called selfish seeking are unworthy, ignoble and
incompatible with a desirable character and must be ignored at all cost.

The futility of this attitude is to be clearly seen in the failure after
all these centuries to even approximate it, as evidenced in our human
relations and institutions, and is quite as ineffectual in this realm as
in that of sexuality where the effort to overcome this imperious
domination has been attempted by lowering the instinct, and seeing in it
something vile or unclean, something unspeakable and unholy. Instead of
destroying the power of sexuality this struggle has only warped and
distorted, injured and mutilated the expression; for not without
destruction of the individual can these fundamental instincts be
destroyed. Life itself has needs and imperiously demands expression
through the forms created. All nature answers to this freely and simply
except man. His failure to recognize himself as an instrument through
which the life energy is coursing and the demands of which must be
obeyed, is the cause of his misery. Despite his possession of intellect
and self-consciousness, he cannot without disaster to himself refuse the
tasks of life and the fulfilment of his own needs. Man’s great task is
the adaptation of himself to reality and the recognition of himself as
an instrument for the expression of life according to his individual
possibilities.

It is in his privilege as a self-creator that his highest purpose is
found.

The value of self-consciousness lies in the fact that man is enabled to
reflect upon himself and learn to understand the true origin and
significance of his actions and opinions, that he may adequately value
the real level of his development and avoid being self-deceived and
therefore inhibited from finding his biological adaptation. He need no
longer be unconscious of the motives underlying his actions or hide
himself behind a changed exterior, in other words, be merely a series of
reactions to stimuli as the mechanists have it, but he may to a certain
extent become a self-creating and self-determining being.

Indeed, there seems to be an impulse towards adaptation quite as Bergson
sees it, and it would seem to be a task of the highest order to use
intelligence to assist one’s self to work with this impulse.


Through the investigation of these different avenues leading into the
hidden depths of the human being and through the revelation of the
motives and influences at work there, although astonishing to the
uninitiated, a very clear and definite conception of the actual human
relationship—brotherhood—of all mankind is obtained. It is this
recognition of these common factors basically inherent in humanity from
the beginning and still active, which is at once both the most hopeful
and the most feared and disliked part of psychoanalysis.

It is disliked by those individuals who have prided themselves upon
their superiority and the distinction between their reactions and
motives and those of ordinary mankind. In other words, they attempt to
become personalities through elevating themselves and lowering others,
and it is a distinct blow to discover that beneath these pretensions lie
the very ordinary elements shared in common by all. On the other hand,
to those who have been able to recognize their own weaknesses and have
suffered in the privacy of their own souls, the knowledge that these
things have not set them apart from others, but that they are the common
property of all and that no one can point the finger of scorn at his
fellow, is one of the greatest experiences of life and is productive of
the greatest relief.

It is feared by many who realize that in these painfully acquired
repressions and symptoms lie their safety and their protection from
directly facing and dealing with tendencies and characteristics with
which they feel unable to cope. The repression and the accompanying
symptoms indicate a difficulty and a struggle, and in this way are a
sort of compromise or substitute formation which permit, although only
in a wasteful and futile manner, the activity of the repressed
tendencies. Nevertheless, to analyze the individual back to his original
tendencies and reveal to him the meaning of these substitute formations
would be a useless procedure in which truly “the last state of that man
would be worse than the first” if the work ceased there. The aim is not
to destroy those barriers upon which civilized man has so painfully
climbed and to reduce him to his primitive state, but, where these have
failed or imperfectly succeeded, to help him to attain his greatest
possibilities with less expenditure of energy, by less wasteful methods
than nature provides. In this achievement lies the hopeful and valuable
side of this method—the development of the synthesis. It is hopeful
because now a way is opened to deal with these primitive tendencies
constructively, and render their effects not only harmless but useful,
by utilizing them in higher aims, socially and individually valuable and
satisfactory.

This is what has occurred normally in those individuals who seem capable
and constructive personalities; in those creative minds that give so
much to the race. They have converted certain psychological tendencies
which could have produced useless symptoms or destructive actions into
valuable productions. Indeed it is not uncommon for strong, capable
persons to state themselves that they knew they could have been equally
capable of a wasteful or destructive life. This utilization of the
energy or libido freed by removing the repressions and the lifting of
infantile tendencies and desires into higher purposes and directions
suitable for the individual at his present status is called
_sublimation_.

It must not be understood by this discussion that geniuses or wonderful
personalities can be created through analysis, for this is not the aim
of the procedure. Its purpose is to remove the inhibitions and
restrictions which interfere with the full development of the
personality, to help individuals attain to that level where they really
belong, and to prepare people to better understand and meet life whether
they are neurotic sufferers or so-called “normal people” with the
difficulties and peculiarities which belong to all.

This reasoning and method of procedure is only new when the application
is made to the human being. In all improvements of plants and animals
these general principles have been recognized and their teachings
constructively utilized.

Luther Burbank, that plant wizard whose work is known to all the world,
says, “A knowledge of the battle of the tendencies within a plant is the
very basis of all plant improvement,” and “it is not that the work of
plant improvement brings with it, incidentally, as people mistakenly
think, a knowledge of these forces, it is the knowledge of these forces,
rather, which makes plant improvement possible.”

Has this not been also the mistake of man regarding himself, and the
cause, partly at least, of his failure to succeed in actually reaching a
more advanced and stable development?

This recognition of man’s biological relationship to all life and the
practical utilization of this recognition, necessitates a readjustment
of thought and asks for an examination and reconsideration of the facts
of human conduct which are observable by any thoughtful person. A quiet
and progressive upheaval of old ideas has taken place and is still going
on. Analytic psychology attempts to unify and value all of the various
phenomena of man which have been observed and noted at different times
by isolated investigators of isolated manifestations and thus bring some
orderly sequence into the whole. It offers a method whereby the
relations of the human being biologically to all other living forms can
be established, the actual achievement of man himself adequately valued,
and opens a vista of the possibilities of improvement in health,
happiness and accomplishment for the human being.