death as the hero, and is even called “faithful brother” by the latter.
These allusions point to a remarkable similarity between horse and
rider. There seems to exist an intimate connection between the two,
which guides them to the same destiny. We already have seen that the
symbolization of “the libido in resistance” through the “terrible
mother” in some places runs parallel with the horse.[574] Strictly
speaking, it would be incorrect to say that the horse is, or means, the
mother. The mother idea is a libido symbol, and the horse is also a
libido symbol, and at some points the two symbols intersect in their
significances. The common feature of the two ideas lies in the libido,
especially in the libido repressed from incest. The hero and the horse
appear to us in this setting like an artistic formation of the idea of
humanity with its repressed libido, whereby the horse acquires the
significance of the animal unconscious, which appears domesticated and
subjected to the will of man. Agni upon the ram, Wotan upon Sleipneir,
Ahuramazda upon Angromainyu,[575] Jahwe upon the monstrous seraph,
Christ upon the ass,[576] Dionysus upon the ass, Mithra upon the horse,
Men upon the human-footed horse, Freir upon the golden-bristled boar,
etc., are parallel representations. The chargers of mythology are always
invested with great significance; they very often appear
anthropomorphized. Thus, Men’s horse has human forelegs; Balaam’s ass,
human speech; the retreating bull, upon whose back Mithra springs in
order to strike him down, is, according to a Persian legend, actually
the God himself. The mock crucifix of the Palatine represents the
crucified with an ass’s head, perhaps in reference to the ancient legend
that in the temple of Jerusalem the image of an ass was worshipped. As
Drosselbart (horse’s mane) Wotan is half-human, half-horse.[577] An old
German riddle very prettily shows this unity between horse and
horseman.[578] “Who are the two, who travel to Thing? Together they have
three eyes, ten feet[579] and one tail; and thus they travel over the
land.” Legends ascribe properties to the horse, which psychologically
belong to the unconscious of man; horses are clairvoyant and
clairaudient; they show the way when the lost wanderer is helpless; they
have mantic powers. In the Iliad the horse prophesies evil. They hear
the words which the corpse speaks when it is taken to the grave—words
which men cannot hear. Cæsar learned from his human-footed horse
(probably taken from the identification of Cæsar with the Phrygian Men)
that he was to conquer the world. An ass prophesied to Augustus the
victory of Actium. The horse also sees phantoms. All these things
correspond to typical manifestations of the unconscious. Therefore, it
is perfectly intelligible that the horse, as the image of the wicked
animal component of man, has manifold connections with the devil. The
devil has a horse’s foot; in certain circumstances a horse’s form. At
crucial moments he suddenly shows a cloven foot (proverbial) in the same
way as in the abduction of Hadding, Sleipneir suddenly looked out from
behind Wotan’s mantle.[580] Just as the nightmare rides on the sleeper,
so does the devil, and, therefore, it is said that those who have
nightmares are ridden by the devil. In Persian lore the devil is the
steed of God. The devil, like all evil things, represents sexuality.
Witches have intercourse with him, in which case he appears in the form
of a goat or horse. The unmistakably phallic nature of the devil is
communicated to the horse as well; hence this symbol occurs in
connections where this is the only meaning which would furnish an
explanation. It is to be mentioned that Loki generates in the form of a
horse, just as does the devil when in horse’s form, as an old fire god.
Thus the lightning was represented theriomorphically as a horse.[581] An
uneducated hysteric told me that as a child she had suffered from
extreme fear of thunder, because every time the lightning flashed she
saw immediately afterwards a huge black horse reaching upwards as far as
the sky.[582] It is said in a legend that the devil, as the divinity of
lightning, casts a horse’s foot (lightning) upon the roofs. In
accordance with the primitive meaning of thunder as fertilizer of the
earth, the phallic meaning is given both to lightning and the horse’s
foot. In mythology the horse’s foot really has the phallic function as
in this dream. An uneducated patient who originally had been violently
forced to coitus by her husband very often dreams (after separation)
that a wild horse springs upon her and kicks her in the abdomen with his
hind foot. Plutarch has given us the following words of a prayer from
the Dionysus orgies:

  ἐλθεῖν ἥρως Διόνυσε Ἄλιον ἐς ναὸν ἁγνὸν σὺν Χαρίτεσσιν ἐς ναὸν τῷ βοέῳ
  ποδὶ θύων, ἄξιε ταῦρε, ἄξιε ταῦρε.[583][584]

Pegasus with his foot strikes out of the earth the spring Hippocrene.
Upon a Corinthian statue of Bellerophon, which was also a fountain, the
water flowed out from the horse’s hoof. Balder’s horse gave rise to a
spring through his kick. Thus the horse’s foot is the dispenser of
fruitful moisture.[585] A legend of lower Austria, told by Jaehns,
informs us that a gigantic man on a white horse is sometimes seen riding
over the mountains. This means a speedy rain. In the German legend the
goddess of birth, Frau Holle, appears on horseback. Pregnant women near
confinement are prone to give oats to a white horse from their aprons
and to pray him to give them a speedy delivery. It was originally the
custom for the horse to rub against the woman’s genitals. The horse
(like the ass) had in general the significance of a priapic animal.[586]
Horse’s tracks are idols dispensing blessing and fertility. Horse’s
tracks established a claim, and were of significance in determining
boundaries, like the priaps of Latin antiquity. Like the phallic
Dactyli, a horse opened the mineral riches of the Harz Mountains with
his hoof. The horseshoe, an equivalent for horse’s foot,[587] brings
luck and has apotropaic meaning. In the Netherlands an entire horse’s
foot is hung up in the stable to ward against sorcery. The analogous
effect of the phallus is well known; hence the phalli at the gates. In
particular the horse’s leg turned lightning aside, according to the
principle “similia similibus.”

Horses also symbolize the wind, that is to say, the tertium
comparationis is again the libido symbol. The German legend recognizes
the wind as the wild huntsman in pursuit of the maiden. Stormy regions
frequently derive their names from horses, as the White Horse Mountain
of the Lüneburger heath. The centaurs are typical wind gods, and have
been represented as such by Böcklin’s artistic intuition.[588]

Horses also signify fire and light. The fiery horses of Helios are an
example. The horses of Hector are called Xanthos (yellow, bright),
Podargos (swift-footed), Lampos (shining) and Aithon (burning). A very
pronounced fire symbolism was represented by the mystic Quadriga,
mentioned by Dio Chrysostomus. The supreme God always drives his chariot
in a circle. Four horses are harnessed to the chariot. The horse driven
on the periphery moves very quickly. He has a shining coat, and bears
upon it the signs of the planets and the Zodiac.[589] This is a
representation of the rotary fire of heaven. The second horse moves more
slowly, and is illuminated only on one side. The third moves still more
slowly, and the fourth rotates around himself. But once the outer horse
set the second horse on fire with his fiery breath, and the third
flooded the fourth with his streaming sweat. Then the horses dissolve
and pass over into the substance of the strongest and most fiery, which
now becomes the charioteer. The horses also represent the four elements.
The catastrophe signifies the conflagration of the world and the deluge,
whereupon the division of the God into many parts ceases, and the divine
unity is restored.[590] Doubtless the Quadriga may be understood
astronomically as a _symbol of time_. We already saw in the first part
that the stoic representation of Fate is a fire symbol. It is,
therefore, a logical continuation of the thought, when time, closely
related to the conception of destiny, exhibits this same libido
symbolism. Brihadâranyaka-Upanishad, i: 1, says:

  “The morning glow verily is the head of the sacrificial horse, the sun
  his eye, the wind his breath, the all-spreading fire his mouth, the
  year is the belly of the sacrificial horse. The sky is his back, the
  atmosphere the cavern of his body, the earth the vault of his belly.
  The poles are his sides, in between the poles his ribs, the seasons
  his limbs, the months and fortnights his joints. Days and nights are
  his feet, stars his bones, clouds his flesh. The food he digests is
  the deserts, the rivers are his veins, the mountains his liver and
  lungs, the herbs and trees his hair; the rising sun is his fore part,
  the setting sun his after part. The ocean is his kinsman, the sea his
  cradle.”

The horse undoubtedly here stands for a time symbol, and also for the
entire world. We come across in the Mithraic religion, a strange God of
Time, Aion, called Kronos or Deus Leontocephalus, because his
stereotyped representation is a lion-headed man, who, standing in a
rigid attitude, is encoiled by a snake, whose head projects forward from
behind over the lion’s head. The figure holds in each hand a key, on the
chest rests a thunderbolt, upon his back are the four wings of the wind;
in addition to that, the figure sometimes bears the Zodiac on his body.
Additional attributes are a cock and implements. In the Carolingian
psalter of Utrecht, which is based upon ancient models, the Sæculum-Aion
is represented as a naked man with a snake in his hand. As is suggested
by the name of the divinity, he is a symbol of time, most interestingly
composed from libido symbols. The lion, the zodiac sign of the greatest
summer heat,[591] is the symbol of the most mighty desire. (“My soul
roars with the voice of a hungry lion,” says Mechthild of Magdeburg.) In
the Mithra mystery the serpent is often antagonistic to the lion,
corresponding to that very universal myth of the battle of the sun with
the dragon.

In the Egyptian Book of the Dead, Tum is even designated as a he-cat,
because as such he fought the snake, Apophis. The encoiling also means
the engulfing, the entering into the mother’s womb. Thus time is defined
by the rising and setting of the sun, that is to say, through the death
and renewal of the libido. The addition of the cock again suggests time,
and the addition of implements suggests the creation through time.
(“Durée créatrice,” Bergson.) Oromazdes and Ahriman were produced
through Zrwanakarana, the “infinitely long duration.” Time, this empty
and purely formal concept, is expressed in the mysteries by
transformations of the creative power, the libido. Macrobius says:

  “Leonis capite monstratur praesens tempus—quia conditio ejus valida
  fervensque est.”[592]

Philo of Alexandria has a better understanding:

  “Tempus ab hominibus pessimis putatur deus volentibus Ens essentiale
  abscondere—pravis hominibus tempus putatur causa rerum mundi,
  sapientibus vero et optimis non tempus sed Deus.”[593][594]

In Firdusi[595] time is often the symbol of fate, the libido nature of
which we have already learned to recognize. The Hindoo text mentioned
above includes still more—its symbol of the horse contains the whole
world; his kinsman and his cradle is the sea, the mother, similar to the
world soul, the maternal significance of which we have seen above. Just
as Aion represents the libido in an embrace, that is to say, in the
state of death and of rebirth, so here the cradle of the horse is the
sea, i. e. the libido is in the mother, dying and rising again, like the
symbol of the dying and resurrected Christ, who hangs like ripe fruit
upon the tree of life.

We have already seen that the horse is connected through Ygdrasil with
the symbolism of the tree. The horse is also a “tree of death”; thus in
the Middle Ages the funeral pyre was called St. Michael’s horse, and the
neo-Persian word for coffin means “wooden horse.”[596] The horse has
also the rôle of psycho-pompos; he is the steed to conduct the souls to
the other world—horsewomen fetch the souls (Valkyries). Neo-Greek songs
represent Charon on a horse. These definitions obviously lead to the
mother symbolism. The Trojan horse was the only means by which the city
could be conquered; because only he who has entered the mother and been
reborn is an invincible hero. The Trojan horse is a magic charm, like
the “Nodfyr,” which also serves to overcome necessity. The formula
evidently reads, “In order to overcome the difficulty, thou must commit
incest, and once more be born from thy mother.” It appears that striking
a nail into the sacred tree signifies something very similar. The “Stock
im Eisen” in Vienna seems to have been such a palladium.

Still another symbolic form is to be considered. Occasionally the devil
rides upon a three-legged horse. The Goddess of Death, Hel, in time of
pestilence, also rides upon a three-legged horse.[597] The gigantic ass,
which is three-legged, stands in the heavenly rain lake Vourukasha; his
urine purifies the water of the lake, and from his roar all useful
animals become pregnant and all harmful animals miscarry. The Triad
further points to the phallic significance. The contrasting symbolism of
Hel is blended into one conception in the ass of Vourukasha. The libido
is fructifying as well as destroying.

These definitions, as a whole, plainly reveal the fundamental features.
The horse is a libido symbol, partly of phallic, partly of maternal
significance, like the tree. It represents the libido in this
application, that is, the libido repressed through the incest
prohibition.

In the Miller drama an Indian approaches the hero, ready to shoot an
arrow at him. Chiwantopel, however, with a proud gesture, exposes his
breast to the enemy. This idea reminds the author of the scene between
Cassius and Brutus in Shakespeare’s “Julius Cæsar.” A misunderstanding
has arisen between the two friends, when Brutus reproaches Cassius for
withholding from him the money for the legions. Cassius, irritable and
angry, breaks out into the complaint:

        “Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come,
        Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius,
        For Cassius is a-weary of the world:
        Hated by one he loves: braved by his brother:
        Check’d like a bondman; _all his faults observed_:
        Set in a note-book, learn’d and conn’d by rote,
        To cast into my teeth. O I could weep
        My spirit from mine eyes!—There is my dagger,
        And here my naked breast; within, a heart
        Dearer than Plutus’ mine, richer than gold:
        If that thou beest a Roman, take it forth:
        I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart.
        Strike, as thou didst at Cæsar; for I know
        When thou didst hate him worst, thou lov’dst him better
        Than ever thou lov’dst Cassius.”

The material here would be incomplete without mentioning the fact that
this speech of Cassius shows many analogies to the agonized delirium of
Cyrano (compare Part I), only Cassius is far more theatrical and
overdrawn. Something childish and hysterical is in his manner. Brutus
does not think of killing him, but administers a very chilling rebuke in
the following dialogue:

     BRUTUS: Sheathe your dagger:
             Be angry when you will, it shall have scope:
             Do what you will, dishonor shall be humor.
             _O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb_
             That carries anger as the flint bears fire:
             Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark,
             And straight is cold again.

     CASSIUS:                            Hath Cassius liv’d
             To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus
             When grief and blood ill-tempered vexeth him?

     BRUTUS: When I spoke that, I was ill-tempered too.

     CASSIUS: Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.

     BRUTUS: And my heart too.

     CASSIUS:                  O Brutus!

     BRUTUS:                             What’s the matter?

     CASSIUS: Have not you love enough to bear with me
              When that rash humor _which my mother gave me_
              Makes me forgetful?

     BRUTUS:                      Yes, Cassius, and from henceforth
              When you are over earnest with your Brutus,
              He’ll think your mother chides and leave you so.

The analytic interpretation of Cassius’s irritability plainly reveals
that at these moments he identifies himself with the mother, and his
conduct, therefore, is truly feminine, as his speech demonstrates most
excellently. For his womanish love-seeking and desperate subjection
under the proud masculine will of Brutus calls forth the friendly remark
of the latter, that Cassius is yoked with a lamb, that is to say, has
something very weak in his character, which is derived from the mother.
One recognizes in this without any difficulty the analytic hall-marks of
an infantile disposition, which, as always, is characterized by a
prevalence of the parent-imago, here the mother-imago. An infantile
individual is infantile because he has freed himself insufficiently, or
not at all, from the childish environment, that is, from his adaptation
to his parents. Therefore, on one side, he reacts falsely towards the
world, as a child towards his parents, always demanding love and
immediate reward for his feelings; on the other side, on account of the
close connection to the parents, he identifies himself with them. The
infantile individual behaves like the father and mother. He is not in a
condition to live for himself and to find the place to which he belongs.
Therefore, Brutus very justly takes it for granted that the “mother
chides” in Cassius, not he himself. The psychologically valuable fact
which we gather here is the information _that Cassius is infantile and
identified_ with the mother. The hysterical behavior is due to the
circumstance that Cassius is still, in part, a lamb, and _an innocent
and entirely harmless child_. He remains, as far as his emotional life
is concerned, still far behind himself. This we often see among people
who, as masters, apparently govern life and fellow-creatures; they have
remained children in regard to the demands of their love nature.

The figures of the Miller dramas, being children of the creator’s
phantasy, depict, as is natural, those traits of character which belong
to the author. The hero, the wish figure, is represented as most
distinguished, because the hero always combines in himself all
wished-for ideals. Cyrano’s attitude is certainly beautiful and
impressive; Cassius’s behavior has a theatrical effect. Both heroes
prepare to die effectively, in which attempt Cyrano succeeds. This
attitude betrays a wish for death in the unconscious of our author, the
meaning of which we have already discussed at length as the motive for
her poem of the moth. The wish of young girls to die is only an indirect
expression, which remains a pose, even in case of real death, for death
itself can be a pose. Such an outcome merely adds beauty and value to
the pose under certain conditions. That the highest summit of life is
expressed through the symbolism of death is a well-known fact; for
creation beyond one’s self means personal death. The coming generation
is the end of the preceding one. This symbolism is frequent in erotic
speech. The lascivious speech between Lucius and the wanton servant-maid
in Apuleius (“Metamorphoses,” lib. ii: 32) is one of the clearest
examples:

  “Proeliare, inquit, et fortiter proeliare: nec enim tibi cedam, nec
  terga vortam. Cominus in aspectum, si vir es, dirige; et grassare
  naviter, et occide moriturus. Hodierna pugna non habet
  missionem.—Simul ambo corruimus inter mutuos amplexus animas
  anhelantes.”[598]

This symbolism is extremely significant, because it shows how easily a
contrasting expression originates and how equally intelligible and
characteristic such an expression is. The proud gesture with which the
hero offers himself to death may very easily be an indirect expression
which challenges the pity or sympathy of the other, and thus is doomed
to the calm analytic reduction to which Brutus proceeds. The behavior of
Chiwantopel is also suspicious, because the Cassius scene which serves
as its model betrays indiscreetly that the whole affair is merely
infantile and one which owes its origin to an overactive mother imago.
When we compare this piece with the series of mother symbols brought to
light in the previous chapter, we must say that the Cassius scene merely
confirms once more what we have long supposed, that is to say, that the
motor power of these symbolic visions arises from an infantile mother
transference, that is to say, from an undetached bond to the mother.

In the drama the libido, in contradistinction to the inactive nature of
the previous symbols, assumes a threatening activity, a conflict
becoming evident, in which the one part threatens the other with murder.
The hero, as the ideal image of the dreamer, is inclined to die; he does
not fear death. In accordance with the infantile character of this hero,
it would most surely be time for him to take his departure from the
stage, or, in childish language, to die. Death is to come to him in the
form of an arrow-wound. Considering the fact that heroes themselves are
very often great archers or succumb to an arrow-wound (St. Sebastian, as
an example), it may not be superfluous to inquire into the meaning of
death through an arrow.

We read in the biography of the stigmatized nun Katherine Emmerich[599]
the following description of the evidently neurotic sickness of her
heart:

  “When only in her novitiate, she received as a Christmas present from
  the holy Christ a very tormenting heart trouble for the whole period
  of her nun’s life. God showed her inwardly the purpose; it was on
  account of the decline of the spirit of the order, especially for the
  sins of her fellow-sisters. But what rendered this trouble most
  painful was the gift which she had possessed from youth, namely, to
  see before her eyes the inner nature of man as he really was. She felt
  the heart trouble physically as if her heart was continually pierced
  by arrows.[600] These arrows—and this represented the still worse
  mental suffering—she recognized as the thoughts, plots, secret
  speeches, misunderstandings, scandal and uncharitableness, in which
  her fellow-sisters, wholly without reason and unscrupulously, were
  engaged against her and her god-fearing way of life.”

It is difficult to be a saint, because even a patient and long-suffering
nature will not readily bear such a violation, and defends itself in its
own way. The companion of sanctity is temptation, without which no true
saint can live. We know from analytic experience that these temptations
can pass unconsciously, so that only their equivalents would be produced
in consciousness in the form of symptoms. We know that it is proverbial
that heart and smart (Herz and Schmerz) rhyme. It is a well-known fact
that hysterics put a physical pain in place of a mental pain. The
biographer of Emmerich has comprehended that very correctly. Only her
interpretation of the pain is, as usual, projected. It is always the
others who secretly assert all sorts of evil things about her, and this
she pretended gave her the pains.[601] The case, however, bears a
somewhat different aspect. The very difficult renunciation of all life’s
joys, this death before the bloom, is generally painful, and especially
painful are the unfulfilled wishes and the attempts of the animal nature
to break through the power of repression. The gossip and jokes of the
sisters very naturally centre around these most painful things, so that
it must appear to the saint as if her symptoms were caused by this.
Naturally, again, she could not know that gossip tends to assume the
rôle of the unconscious, which, like a clever adversary, always aims at
the actual gaps in our armor.

A passage from Gautama Buddha embodies this idea:[602]

                  “A wish earnestly desired
                  Produced by will, and nourished
                  When gradually it must be thwarted,
                  Burrows like an arrow in the flesh.”

The wounding and painful arrows do not come from without through gossip,
which only attacks externally, but they come from ambush, from our own
unconscious. This, rather than anything external, creates the
defenseless suffering. It is our _own repressed and unrecognized desires
which fester like arrows in our flesh_.[603] In another connection this
was clear to the nun, and that most literally. It is a well-known fact,
and one which needs no further proof to those who understand, that these
mystic scenes of union with the Saviour generally are intermingled with
an enormous amount of sexual libido.[604] Therefore, it is not
astonishing that the scene of the stigmata is nothing but an incubation
through the Saviour, only slightly changed metaphorically, as compared
with the ancient conception of “unio mystica,” as cohabitation with the
god. Emmerich relates the following of her stigmatization:

  “I had a contemplation of the sufferings of Christ, and implored him
  to let me feel with him his sorrows, and prayed five paternosters to
  the honor of the five sacred wounds. Lying on my bed with outstretched
  arms, I entered into a great sweetness and into an endless thirst for
  the torments of Jesus. Then I saw a light descending upon me: it came
  obliquely from above. It was a crucified body, living and transparent,
  with arms extended, but without a cross. The wounds shone brighter
  than the body; they were five circles of glory, coming forth from the
  whole glory. I was enraptured and my heart was moved with great pain
  and yet with sweetness from longing to share in the torments of my
  Saviour. And my longings for the sorrows of the Redeemer increased
  more and more on gazing on his wounds, and passed from my breast,
  through my hands, sides and feet to his holy wounds: then from the
  hands, then from the sides, then from the feet of the figure threefold
  shining red beams ending below in an arrow, shot forth to my hands,
  sides and feet.”

The beams, in accordance with the phallic fundamental thought, are
threefold, terminating below in an arrow-point.[605] Like Cupid, the
sun, too, has its quiver, full of destroying or fertilizing arrows, sun
rays,[606] which possess phallic meaning. On this significance evidently
rests the Oriental custom of designating brave sons as arrows and
javelins of the parents. “To make sharp arrows” is an Arabian expression
for “to generate brave sons.” The Psalms declare (cxxvii:4):

  “Like as the arrows in the hands of the giant; even so are the young
  children.”

(Compare with this the remarks previously made about “boys.”) Because of
this significance of the arrow it is intelligible why the Scythian king
Ariantes, when he wished to prepare a census, demanded an arrow-head
from each man. A similar meaning attaches equally to the lance. Men are
descended from the lance, because the ash is the mother of lances.
Therefore, the men of the Iron Age are derived from her. The marriage
custom to which Ovid alludes (“Comat virgineas hasta recurva
comas”—_Fastorum_, lib. ii: 560) has already been mentioned. Kaineus
issued a command that his lance be honored. Pindar relates in the legend
of this Kaineus:

  “He descended into the depths, splitting the earth with a straight
  foot.”[607]

He is said to have originally been a maiden named Kainis, who, because
of her complaisance, was transformed into an invulnerable man by
Poseidon. Ovid pictures the battle of the Lapithæ with the invulnerable
Kaineus; how at last they covered him completely with trees, because
they could not otherwise touch him. Ovid says at this place:

           “Exitus in dubio est: alii sub inania corpus
           Tartara detrusum silvarum mole ferebant,
           Abnuit Ampycides: medioque ex aggere fulvis
           Vidit avem pennis liquidas exire sub auras.”[608]

Roscher considers this bird to be the golden plover (Charadrius
pluvialis), which borrows its name from the fact that it lives in the
χαράδρα, a crevice in the earth. By his song he proclaims the
approaching rain. Kaineus was changed into this bird.

We see again in this little myth the typical constituents of the libido
myth: original bisexuality, immortality (invulnerability) through
entrance into the mother (splitting the mother with the foot, and to
become covered up) and resurrection as a bird of the soul and a bringer
of fertility (ascending sun). When this type of hero causes his lance to
be worshipped, it probably means that his lance is a valid and
equivalent expression of himself.

From our present standpoint, we understand in a new sense that passage
in Job, which I mentioned in Chapter IV of the first part of this book:

  “He has set me up for his mark.

  “His archers compass me round about, he cleaveth my reins asunder, and
  doth not spare:—he poureth out my gall upon the ground.

  “He breaketh me with breach upon breach: he runneth upon me like a
  giant.”—_Job_ xvi:12–13–14.

Now we understand this symbolism as an expression for the soul torment
caused by the onslaught of the unconscious desires. The libido festers
in his flesh, a cruel god has taken possession of him and pierced him
with his painful libidian projectiles, with thoughts, which
overwhelmingly pass through him. (As a dementia præcox patient once said
to me during his recovery: “To-day a thought suddenly thrust itself
through me.”) This same idea is found again in Nietzsche in Zarathustra:

                           _The Magician_

           Stretched out, shivering
           Like one half dead whose feet are warmed,
           Shaken alas! by unknown fevers,
           Trembling from the icy pointed arrows of frost,
           Hunted by Thee, O Thought!
           Unutterable! Veiled! Horrible One!
           Thou huntsman behind the clouds!
           Struck to the ground by thee,
           Thou mocking eye that gazeth at me from the dark!
           —————— Thus do I lie
           Bending, writhing, tortured
           With all eternal tortures,
           Smitten
           By thee, crudest huntsman,
           Thou unfamiliar God.

           Smite deeper!
           Smite once more:
           Pierce through and rend my heart!
           What meaneth this torturing
           With blunt-toothed arrows?
           Why gazeth thou again,
           Never weary of human pain,
           With malicious, God-lightning eyes,
           Thou wilt not kill,
           But torture, torture?

No long-drawn-out explanation is necessary to enable us to recognize in
this comparison the old, universal idea of the martyred sacrifice of
God, which we have met previously in the Mexican sacrifice of the cross
and in the sacrifice of Odin.[609] This same conception faces us in the
oft-repeated martyrdom of St. Sebastian, where, in the delicate-glowing
flesh of the young god, all the pain of renunciation which has been felt
by the artist has been portrayed. An artist always embodies in his
artistic work a portion of the mysteries of his time. In a heightened
degree the same is true of the principal Christian symbol, the crucified
one pierced by the lance, the conception of the man of the Christian era
tormented by his wishes, crucified and dying in Christ.

This is not torment which comes from without, which befalls mankind; but
that he himself is the hunter, murderer, sacrificer and sacrificial
knife is shown us in another of Nietzsche’s poems, wherein the apparent
dualism is transformed into the soul conflict through the use of the
same symbolism:

                 “Oh, Zarathustra,
                 Most cruel Nimrod!
                 Whilom hunter of God
                 The snare of all virtue,
                 An arrow of evil!
                 Now
                 Hunted by thyself
                 Thine own prey
                 Pierced through thyself,
                 Now
                 Alone with thee
                 Twofold in thine own knowledge
                 Mid a hundred mirrors
                 False to thyself,
                 Mid a hundred memories
                 Uncertain
                 Ailing with each wound
                 Shivering with each frost
                 Caught in thine own snares,
                 Self knower!
                 Self hangman!

                 “Why didst thou strangle thyself
                 With the noose of thy wisdom?
                 Why hast thou enticed thyself
                 Into the Paradise of the old serpent?
                 Why hast thou crept
                 Into thyself, thyself?...”

The deadly arrows do not strike the hero from without, but it is he
himself who, in disharmony with himself, hunts, fights and tortures
himself. Within himself will has turned against will, libido against
libido—therefore, the poet says, “Pierced through thyself,” that is to
say, wounded by his own arrow. Because we have discerned that the arrow
is a libido symbol, the idea of “penetrating or piercing through”
consequently becomes clear to us. It is a phallic act of union with
one’s self, a sort of self-fertilization (introversion); also a
self-violation, a self-murder; therefore, Zarathustra may call himself
his own hangman, like Odin, who sacrifices himself to Odin.

The wounding by one’s own arrow means, first of all, _the state of
introversion_. What this signifies we already know—the libido sinks into
its “own depths” (a well-known comparison of Nietzsche’s) and finds
there below, in the shadows of the unconscious, the substitute for the
upper world, which it has abandoned: _the world of memories_ (“’mid a
hundred memories”), the strongest and most influential of which are the
early infantile memory pictures. It is the world of the child, this
paradise-like state of earliest childhood, from which we are separated
by a hard law. In this subterranean kingdom slumber sweet feelings of
home and the endless hopes of all that is to be. As Heinrich in the
“Sunken Bell,” by Gerhart Hauptmann, says, in speaking of his miraculous
work:

             “There is a song lost and forgotten,
             A song of home, a love song of childhood,
             Brought up from the depths of the fairy well,
             Known to all, but yet unheard.”

However, as Mephistopheles says, “The danger is great.” These depths are
enticing; they are the mother and—death. When the libido leaves the
bright upper world, whether from the decision of the individual or from
decreasing life force, then it sinks back into its own depths, into the
source from which it has gushed forth, and turns back to that point of
cleavage, the umbilicus, through which it once entered into this body.
This point of cleavage is called the mother, because from her comes the
source of the libido. Therefore, when some great work is to be
accomplished, before which weak man recoils, doubtful of his strength,
his libido returns to that source—and this is the dangerous moment, in
which the decision takes place between annihilation and new life. If the
libido remains arrested in the wonder kingdom of the inner world,[610]
then the man has become for the world above a phantom, then he is
practically dead or desperately ill.[611] But if the libido succeeds in
tearing itself loose and pushing up into the world above, then a miracle
appears. This journey to the underworld has been a fountain of youth,
and new fertility springs from his apparent death. This train of thought
is very beautifully gathered into a Hindoo myth: Once upon a time,
Vishnu sank into an ecstasy (introversion) and during this state of
sleep bore Brahma, who, enthroned upon the lotus flower, arose from the
navel of Vishnu, bringing with him the Vedas, which he diligently read.
(Birth of creative thought from introversion.) But through Vishnu’s
ecstasy a devouring flood came upon the world. (Devouring through
introversion, symbolizing the danger of entering into the mother of
death.) A demon taking advantage of the danger, stole the Vedas from
Brahma and hid them in the depths. (Devouring of the libido.) Brahma
roused Vishnu, and the latter, transforming himself into a fish, plunged
into the flood, fought with the demon (battle with the dragon),
conquered him and recaptured the Vedas. (Treasure obtained with
difficulty.)

Self-concentration and the strength derived therefrom correspond to this
primitive train of thought. It also explains numerous sacrificial and
magic rites which we have already fully discussed. Thus the impregnable
Troy falls because the besiegers creep into the belly of a wooden horse;
for he alone is a hero who is reborn from the mother, like the sun. But
the danger of this venture is shown by the history of Philoctetes, who
was the only one in the Trojan expedition who knew the hidden sanctuary
of Chryse, where the Argonauts had sacrificed already, and where the
Greeks planned to sacrifice in order to assure a safe ending to their
undertaking. Chryse was a nymph upon the island of Chryse; according to
the account of the scholiasts in Sophocles’s “Philoctetes,” this nymph
loved Philoctetes, and cursed him because he spurned her love. This
characteristic projection, which is also met with in the Gilgamesh epic,
should be referred back, as suggested, to the repressed incest wish of
the son, who is represented through the projection as if the mother had
the evil wish, for the refusal of which the son was given over to death.
In reality, however, the son becomes mortal by separating himself from
the mother. His fear of death, therefore, corresponds to the repressed
wish to turn back to the mother, and causes him to believe that the
mother threatens or pursues him. The teleological significance of this
_fear of persecution_ is evident; _it is to keep son and mother apart_.

The curse of Chryse is realized in so far that Philoctetes, according to
one version, when approaching his altar, injured himself in his foot
with one of his own deadly poisonous arrows, or, according to another
version[612] (this is better and far more abundantly proven), _was
bitten in his foot by a poisonous serpent_.[613] From then on he is
ailing.[614]

This very typical wound, which also destroyed Rê, is described in the
following manner in an Egyptian hymn:

          “The ancient of the Gods moved his mouth,
          He cast his saliva upon the earth,
          And what he spat, fell upon the ground.
          With her hands Isis kneaded that and the soil
          Which was about it, together:
          From that she created a venerable worm,
          And made him like a spear.
          She did not twist him living around her face,
          But threw him coiled upon the path,
          Upon which the great God wandered at ease
          Through all his lands.

          “The venerable God stepped forth radiantly,
          The gods who served Pharaoh accompanied him,
          And he proceeded as every day.
          Then the venerable worm stung him....
          The divine God opened his mouth
          And the voice of his majesty echoed even to the sky.
          And the gods exclaimed: Behold!
          Thereupon he could not answer,
          His jaws chattered,
          All his limbs trembled
          And the poison gripped his flesh,
          As the Nile seizes upon the land.”

In this hymn Egypt has again preserved for us a primitive conception of
the serpent’s sting. The aging of the autumn sun as an image of human
senility is symbolically traced back to the mother through the poisoning
by the serpent. The mother is reproached, because her malice causes the
death of the sun-god. The serpent, the primitive symbol of fear,[615]
illustrates the repressed tendency to turn back to the mother, because
the only possibility of security from death is possessed by the mother,
as the source of life.

Accordingly, only the mother can cure him, sick unto death, and,
therefore, the hymn goes on to depict how the gods were assembled to
take counsel:

      “And Isis came with her wisdom:
      Her mouth is full of the breath of life,
      Her words banish sorrow,
      And her speech animates those who no longer breathe.
      She said: ‘What is that; what is that, divine father?
      Behold, a worm has brought you sorrow——’

      “‘Tell me thy name, divine father,
      Because the man remains alive, who is called by his name.’”

Whereupon Rê replied:

    “‘I am he, who created heaven and earth, and piled up the hills,
    And created all beings thereon.
    I am he, who made the water and caused the great flood,
    Who produced the bull of his mother,
    Who is the procreator,’ etc.

    “The poison did not depart, it went further,
    The great God was not cured.
    Then said Isis to Rê:
    ‘Thine is not the name thou hast told me.
    Tell me true that the poison may leave thee,
    For he whose name is spoken will live.’”

Finally Rê decides to speak his true name. He is approximately healed
(imperfect composition of Osiris); but he has lost his power, and
finally he retreats to the heavenly cow.

The poisonous worm is, if one may speak in this way, a “negative”
phallus, a deadly, not an animating, form of libido; therefore, a wish
for death, instead of a wish for life. The “true name” is soul and magic
power; hence a symbol of libido. What Isis demands is the retransference
of the libido to the mother goddess. This request is fulfilled
literally, for the aged god turns back to the divine cow, the symbol of
the mother.[616] This symbolism is clear from our previous explanations.
The onward urging, living libido which rules the consciousness of the
son, demands separation from the mother. The longing of the child for
the mother is a hindrance on the path to this, taking the form of a
psychologic resistance, which is expressed empirically in the neurosis
by all manners of fears, that is to say, the fear of life. The more a
person withdraws from adaptation to reality, and falls into slothful
inactivity, the greater becomes his anxiety (cum grano salis), which
everywhere besets him at each point as a hindrance upon his path. The
fear springs from the mother, that is to say, from the longing to go
back to the mother, which is opposed to the adaptation to reality. This
is the way in which the mother has become apparently the malicious
pursuer. Naturally, it is not the actual mother, although the actual
mother, with the abnormal tenderness with which she sometimes pursues
her child, even into adult years, may gravely injure it through a
willful prolonging of the infantile state in the child. It is rather the
mother-imago, which becomes the Lamia. The mother-imago, however,
possesses its power solely and exclusively from the son’s tendency not
only to look and to work forwards, but also to glance backwards to the
pampering sweetness of childhood, to that glorious state of
irresponsibility and security with which the protecting mother-care once
surrounded him.[617]

The retrospective longing acts like a paralyzing poison upon the energy
and enterprise; so that it may well be compared to a poisonous serpent
which lies across our path. Apparently, it is a hostile demon which robs
us of energy, but, in reality, it is the individual unconscious, the
retrogressive tendency of which begins to overcome the conscious forward
striving. The cause of this can be, for example, the natural aging which
weakens the energy, or it may be great external difficulties, which
cause man to break down and become a child again, or it may be, and this
is probably the most frequent cause, the woman who enslaves the man, so
that he can no longer free himself, and becomes a child again.[618] It
may be of significance also that Isis, as sister-wife of the sun-god,
creates the poisonous animal from the spittle of the god, which is
perhaps a substitute for sperma, and, therefore, is a symbol of libido.
She creates the animal from the libido of the god; that means she
receives his power, making him weak and dependent, so that by this means
she assumes the dominating rôle of the mother. (Mother transference to
the wife.) This part is preserved in the legend of Samson, in the rôle
of Delilah, who cut off Samson’s hair, the sun’s rays, thus robbing him
of his strength.[619] Any weakening of the adult man strengthens the
wishes of the unconscious; therefore, the decrease of strength appears
directly as the backward striving towards the mother.

There is still to be considered one more source of the reanimation of
the mother-imago. We have already met it in the discussion of the mother
scene in “Faust,” that is to say, _the willed introversion of a creative
mind_, which, retreating before its own problem and inwardly collecting
its forces, dips at least for a moment into the source of life, in order
there to wrest a little more strength from the mother for the completion
of its work. It is a mother-child play with one’s self, in which lies
much weak selfadmiration and self-adulation (“Among a hundred
mirrors”—Nietzsche); _a Narcissus state_, a strange spectacle, perhaps,
for profane eyes. The separation from the mother-imago, the birth out of
one’s self, reconciles all conflicts through the sufferings. This is
probably meant by Nietzsche’s verse:

                 “Why hast thou enticed thyself
                 Into the Paradise of the old serpent?
                 Why hast thou crept
                 Into thyself, thyself?...

                 “A sick man now
                 Sick of a serpent’s poison,[620]
                 A captive now
                 Whom the hardest destiny befell
                 In thine own pit;
                 Bowed down as thou workest
                 Encaved within thyself,
                 Burrowing into thyself,
                 Helpless,
                 Stiff,
                 A corpse.
                 Overwhelmed with a hundred burdens,
                 Overburdened by thyself.
                 A wise man,
                 A self-knower,
                 The wise Zarathustra;
                 Thou soughtest the heaviest burden
                 And foundest thou thyself....”

The symbolism of this speech is of the greatest richness. He is buried
in the depths of _self, as if in the earth_; really a dead man who has
turned back to mother earth;[621] a Kaineus “piled with a hundred
burdens” and pressed down to death; the one who groaning bears the heavy
burden of his own libido, of that libido which draws him back to the
mother. Who does not think of the Taurophoria of Mithra, who took his
bull (according to the Egyptian hymn, “the bull of his mother”), that
is, his love for his mother, the heaviest burden upon his back, and with
that entered upon the painful course of the so-called Transitus![622]
This path of passion led to the cave, in which the bull was sacrificed.
Christ, too, had to bear the cross,[623] the symbol of his love for the
mother, and he carried it to the place of sacrifice where the lamb was
slain in the form of the God, the infantile man, a “self-executioner,”
and then to burial in the subterranean sepulchre.[624]

That which in Nietzsche appears as a poetical figure of speech is really
a primitive myth. It is as if the poet still possessed a dim idea or
capacity to feel and reactivate those imperishable phantoms of long-past
worlds of thought in the words of our present-day speech and in the
images which crowd themselves into his phantasy. Hauptmann also says:
“Poetic rendering is that which allows the echo of the primitive word to
resound through the form.”[625]


The sacrifice, with its mysterious and manifold meaning, which is rather
hinted at than expressed, passes unrecognized in the unconscious of our
author. The arrow is not shot, the hero Chiwantopel is not yet fatally
poisoned and ready for death through self-sacrifice. We now can say,
according to the preceding material, this sacrifice means renouncing the
mother, that is to say, _renunciation of all bonds and limitations which
the soul has taken with it from the period of childhood into the adult
life_. From various hints of Miss Miller’s it appears that at the time
of these phantasies she was still living in the circle of the family,
evidently at an age which was in urgent need of independence. That is to
say, man does not live very long in the infantile environment or in the
bosom of his family without real danger to his mental health. Life calls
him forth to independence, and he who gives no heed to this hard call
because of childish indolence and fear is threatened by a neurosis, and
once the neurosis has broken out it becomes more and more a valid reason
to escape the battle with life and to remain for all time in the morally
poisoned infantile atmosphere.

The phantasy of the arrow-wound belongs in this struggle for personal
independence. The thought of this resolution has not yet penetrated the
dreamer. On the contrary, she rather repudiates it. After all the
preceding, it is evident that the symbolism of the arrow-wound through
direct translation must be taken as a coitus symbol. The “Occide
moriturus” attains by this means the sexual significance belonging to
it. Chiwantopel naturally represents the dreamer. But nothing is
attained and nothing is understood through one’s reduction to the coarse
sexual, because it is a commonplace that the unconscious shelters coitus
wishes, the discovery of which signifies nothing further. _The coitus
wish under this aspect is really a symbol for the individual
demonstration of the libido separated from the parents, of the conquest
of an independent life._ This step towards a new life means, at the same
time, the death of the past life.[626] Therefore, Chiwantopel is the
infantile hero[627] (the son, the child, the lamb, the fish) who is
still enchained by the fetters of childhood and who has to die as a
symbol of the incestuous libido, and with that sever the retrogressive
bond. For the entire libido is demanded for the battle of life, and
there can be no remaining behind. The dreamer cannot yet come to this
decision, which will tear aside all the sentimental connections with
father and mother, and yet it must be made in order to follow the call
of the individual destiny.