The theory of Freud, branching off from this interpretation, according
to which the motor forces of a neurotic system correspond precisely to
their libidinous additions to other (non-sexual) functional impulses,
has been sufficiently proven as correct, it seems to me, by the work of
Freud and his school.[242] Since the appearance of the “Three
Contributions,” in 1905, a change has taken place[243] in the libido
conception; its field of application has been widened. An extremely
clear example of this amplification is this present work. However, I
must state that Freud, as well as myself, saw the need of widening the
conception of libido. It was paranoia, so closely related to dementia
præcox, which seemed to compel Freud to enlarge the earlier limits of
the conception. The passage in question, which I will quote here, word
for word, reads:[244]

  “A third consideration which presents itself, in regard to the views
  developed here, starts the query as to whether we should accept as
  sufficiently effectual the universal receding of the libido from the
  outer world, in order to interpret from that, the end of the world: or
  whether in this case, the firmly rooted possession of the ‘I’ must not
  suffice to uphold the rapport with the outer world. Then one must
  either let that which we call possession of the libido (interest from
  erotic sources) coincide with interest in general, or else take into
  consideration the possibility that great disturbance in the
  disposition of the libido can also induce a corresponding disturbance
  in the possession of the ‘I.’ Now, these are the problems, which we
  are still absolutely helpless and unfitted to answer. Things would be
  different could we proceed from a safe fund of knowledge of instinct.
  But the truth is, we have nothing of that kind at our disposal. We
  understand instinct as the resultant of the reaction of the somatic
  and the psychic. We see in it the psychical representation of organic
  forces and take the popular distinction between the ‘I’ impulse and
  the sexual impulse, which appears to us to be in accord with the
  biological double rôle of the individual being who aspires to his own
  preservation as well as to the preservation of the species. But
  anything beyond this is a structure, which we set up, and also
  willingly let fall again in order to orient ourselves in the confusion
  of the dark processes of the soul; we expect particularly, from the
  psychoanalytic investigations into diseased soul processes, to have
  certain decisions forced upon us in regard to questions of the theory
  of instinct. This expectation has not yet been fulfilled on account of
  the still immature and limited investigations in these fields. At
  present the possibility of the reaction of libido disturbance upon the
  possession of the ‘I’ can be shown as little as the reverse; the
  secondary or induced disturbances of the libido processes through
  abnormal changes in the ‘I.’ It is probable that processes of this
  sort form the distinctive character of the psychoses. The conclusions
  arising from this, in relation to paranoia, are at present uncertain.
  One cannot assert that the paranoiac has completely withdrawn his
  interest from the outer world, nor withdrawn into the heights of
  repression, as one sometimes sees in certain other forms of
  hallucinatory psychoses. He takes notice of the outer world, he takes
  account of its changes, he is stirred to explanations by their
  influence, and therefore I consider it highly probable that the
  changed relation to the world is to be explained, wholly or in great
  part, by the deficiency of the libido interest.”