THE BEGINNINGS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS

The beginnings of this work were first published in 1895 in a book
entitled “Studien über Hysterie,” and contained the joint investigations
into hysteria of Dr. Breuer of Vienna and his pupil Dr. Sigmund Freud.
The results of their investigations seemed to show that the various
symptoms grouped under the title of hysteria were the result of
emotionally colored reminiscences which, all unknown to the conscious
waking self, were really actively expressing themselves through the
surrogate form of symptoms and that these experiences, although
forgotten by the patient, could be reproduced and the emotional content
discharged.

Hypnosis was the means used to enable the physician to penetrate deeply
into the forgotten memories, for it was found through hypnosis that
these lost incidents and circumstances were not really lost at all but
only dropped from consciousness, and were capable of being revived when
given the proper stimuli. The astonishing part about it was that with
the revival of these memories and their accompanying painful and
disturbing emotions, the symptoms disappeared. This led naturally to the
conclusion that these symptoms were dependent upon some emotional
disturbance or psychic trauma which had been inadequately expressed, and
that in order to cure the patient one merely had to establish the
connection between the memory and the emotions which properly belonged
to it, letting the emotion work itself out through a reproduction of the
forgotten scene.

With further investigation Freud found that hypnosis was unnecessary for
the revival of the forgotten experiences, and that it was possible to
obtain the lost emotional material in the conscious and normal state.
For this purpose the patient was encouraged to assume a passive,
non-critical attitude and simply let his thoughts flow, speaking of
whatever came into his mind, holding nothing back. During this free and
easy discussion of his life and conditions, directed by the law of
association of ideas, reference was invariably made to the experiences
or thoughts which were the most affective and disturbing elements. It
was seen to be quite impossible to avoid this indirect revelation
because of the strength of the emotions surrounding these ideas and the
effect of the conscious wish to repress unpleasant feelings. This
important group of ideas or impressions, with the feelings and emotions
clustered around them which are betrayed through this process, was called by
Jung a _complex_.

However, with the touching of the _complex_ which always contains
feelings and emotions so painful or unpleasant as to be unacceptable to
consciousness, and which are therefore repressed and hidden, great
difficulties appeared, for very often the patient came to a sudden stop
and could apparently recall nothing more. Memory gaps were frequent,
relations twisted, etc. Evidently some force banished these memories so
that the person was quite honest in saying that he could remember
nothing or that there was nothing to tell. This kind of forgetfulness
was called _repression_, and is the normal mechanism by which nature
protects the individual from such painful feelings as are caused by
unpleasant and unacceptable experiences and thoughts, the recognition of
his egoistic nature, and the often quite unbearable conflict of his
weaknesses with his feelings of idealism.

At this early time great attention was given towards developing a
technique which would render more easy the reproduction of these
forgotten memories, for with the abandonment of hypnosis it was seen
that some unknown active force was at work which not only banished
painful memories and feelings, but also prevented their return; this was
called _resistance_. This resistance was found to be the important
mechanism which interfered with a free flow of thought and produced the
greatest difficulty in the further conduct of the analysis. It appeared
under various guises and frequently manifested itself in intellectual
objections based on reasoning ground, in criticism directed towards the
analyst, or in criticism of the method itself, and finally, often in a
complete blocking of expression, so that until the resistance was broken
nothing more could be produced.

It was necessary then to find some aid by which these resistances could
be overcome and the repressed memories and feelings revived and set
free. For it was proven again and again that even though the person was
not at all aware of concealing within himself some emotionally
disturbing feeling or experience with which his symptoms were
associated, yet such was the fact, and that under proper conditions this
material could be brought into consciousness. This realm where these
unknown but disturbing emotions were hidden was called the
“Unconscious”—the “Unconscious” also being a name used arbitrarily to
indicate all that material of which the person is not aware at the given
time—the not-conscious.

This term is used very loosely in Freudian psychology and is not
intended to provoke any academic discussion but to conform strictly to
the dictionary classification of a “negative concept which can neither
be described nor defined.” To say that an idea or feeling is unconscious
merely means to indicate that the individual is unaware at that time of
its existence, or that all the material of which he is unaware at a
given time is unconscious.